Growing attention has been paid to understanding public risk perceptions of shale gas development. This research has largely been conducted in the United States and Europe. Arguably, the environmental and social risks posed by drilling are potentially more severe in places like China, due to its geography and political system. However, little is known how those constantly exposed to risks (the “affected” public) evaluate these risks. In this study, in-depth interviews were conducted with local residents (n=25) in Weiyuan County, Sichuan Province, the region with the largest shale gas reserves in the country, to identify the perceived risks of the affected Chinese public and to explore underlying factors that impact risk perception. Our results suggest that affected Chinese residents were most concerned about groundwater contamination and air pollution above all other risks, and they tended to link risks to spatial proximity to shale gas wells. The multifaceted nature of perceived benefits played a novel and nuanced role in Chinese residents’ risk perception. Pride and disempowerment were found to attenuate the risk judgments of affected Chinese residents, which has not been observed in previous literature. Our findings provides policymakers with insight into how to improve risk communications to enhance understanding of affected publics, as well as to better design compensation schemes that may address inequities.
Advanced technologies such as hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling have allowed for the extraction of natural gas in previously uneconomically viable shale deposits, thus, raising the profile of shale gas as a cheap and lower carbon alternative to coal [1]. However, the promise of shale gas has been tempered by reported environmental and health risks, which has received broad attention through media reports and documentaries such as Gasland [[2], [3], [4]]. In certain regions of the world, such as China, shale gas development and extraction poses greater environmental risk than in other regions. The main reason for this difference is a confluence of complex geological conditions, high population density, and lax or no environmental regulations compared to other countries that are also experiencing shale gas development [5,6]. Hence, risk perceptions of the public, particularly of those affected, could differ greatly from those observed in other parts of the world. The affected public in the Western world express concern about environmental, operational, health, and social risks [[7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]]. Whether risk perceptions in a place like China are similar to those expressed in the West is an empirical question, as little research has been conducted to date on this topic in China. Answering this question will allow for a more nuanced and tailored approach to informing shale gas policy, regulations, and development processes in places like China.

More specifically, this study aims to highlight the unique characteristics of risk perceptions of those affected in China in relation to benefits associated with shale gas development. Perhaps the most notable difference between China and the other two world’s largest shale gas producers – U.S. and Canada – is that both surface and subsurface rights are owned by the state as opposed to private entities [14]. In contrast to private landowners in US and Canada who may profit greatly from leasing such rights to operators, there is no opportunity for affected Chinese residents to benefit economically. Thus, residents are asked to bear the brunt of the risks associated with shale development that are likely to exceed the possible personal benefits [[15], [16], [17]]. Indeed, in many cases in China, those who are affected rely on wells for drinking water. Thus, these residents are exposed to potentially greater environmental and health risks than in other places in the world [18]. Moreover, those affected by development generally make a living on agricultural production that requires a secure source of water and good soil to attain desirable yields. Drilling, however, competes with the agriculture sector for a large quantity of water resources that are already scarce in Sichuan Basin region [6] and occasionally leads to contamination of irrigation water and farmland on which crops are grown [19]. Moreover, affected residents also tend to rely on fishing for food and supplemental income, which may also be at risk due to wastewater leaks. Overall, due to the imbalance of little economic benefits/gains or even losses from agricultural production [20], shale gas development in China could potentially result in larger problems of environmental inequity.

Therefore, in this study, we characterize the risk perceptions of the affected public in China given their unique political and socioeconomic context. We achieve our research objective through conducting open-ended interviews with residents in Weiyuan County, Sichuan Province, who live and work in close proximity to existing and former shale gas development sites. The next section provides an overview of previous research on risk perceptions towards shale gas development. Then, we present our research methods, including the interview protocol and coding process. Next, we present the results and a discussion of our semi-structured interviews. Finally, we conclude with possible policy implications.
The importance of eliciting public concern about new or emerging technologies is underscored by decades of research suggesting that non-expert judgments of risk can differ markedly from experts [3,[21], [22], [23], [24], [25]]. Indeed, scholarship in science and technology studies argue that non-expert judgment is important for a variety of reasons: enhancement of the democratization of science, fulfilling tacit or explicit procedural justice goals, and learning about new risks not identified by those traditionally designated as ‘expert’ [[26], [27], [28], [29], [30]].

Recent research suggests that experts are largely concerned about the environmental impacts of shale gas development, whereas non-experts are also worried about health impacts, operational accidents such as gas leaks and explosions, and social effects such as real estate value [3,9,25,31]. These additional concerns may provide guidance to researchers of what needs to be better communicated to the public or offers new avenues of investigation, in order for technologies like hydraulic fracturing to become better understood and perhaps even accepted. This line of research highlights the importance of eliciting the concerns of non-experts, or public, to better ascertain the full breadth of risk perceptions.
Risk perceptions – subjective judgment about risks – are key to explaining the public’s attitudes toward energy technologies, including nuclear and wind [32,33], even more so than perceptions of benefits [34]. Indeed, higher levels of risk perceptions have been found to be related to public opposition for emerging technologies [33,35]. Hence, understanding risk perceptions and the basis for concern about shale gas development, particularly in local communities, is vital for facilitating healthy public discourse before attitudes become intractable.

Recent studies on public perceptions of shale gas development suggest people in the West are primarily concerned about four overlapping types of risks: environmental, operational, health, and social [2,8,25,[36], [37], [38]]. We refer to this division of risks throughout this paper, however it is worthwhile noting that these types of risks are not necessarily mutually exclusive. For example, respiratory and gastric system health impacts or economic loss due to poultry and fish deaths are secondary risks that may arise from the primary risk of wastewater leakage [39].
Recent research finds that people affected by local shale gas development are mostly concerned about water depletion and pollution [8,11,36,[40], [41], [42], [43]]. Hydraulic fracturing requires large quantities of freshwater [4,44,45], and thus may exacerbate existing water shortages and conflicts among users. Indeed, Anderson and Theodori [40] find high levels of public concern in the Barnett Shale region about decreasing supplies of freshwater due to the large amount of water required for shale gas development. These concerns have been echoed by other local publics, such as those in the Marcellus Shale region [36]. Related concerns center on water pollution, which can occur through improper treatment of wastewater or flowback water [46], release of chemicals used in hydraulic fracturing [47], and gas leaks into freshwater aquifers through cracked fissures of shale formation [15]. People are also bothered by, to a lesser extent, noise and light pollution [8,40].

Construal level theory may provide a lens through which to understand how individuals perceive various environmental risks [48]. This theory predicts that an individual’s evaluation of a risk depends on whether it seen as psychologically proximal or distant [49]. When the perceived psychological distance is proximate, people process the risk using concrete and background-related information; when the perceived psychological distance is distal, people rely on abstract and general information. Therefore, people in close proximity to extraction may express different risk perceptions than those who are far away [49]. On balance, people tend to be more concerned about environmental risks in close proximity than those that are far away [50].
People are also concerned about a number of operational risks that may occur during development or production, among which the most serious are those associated with gas leaks and explosions [8,40], and induced seismicity [51]. However, people are also concerned about traffic and truck accidents. For example, Texas residents reported being concerned about increased traffic accidents that were occurring with greater frequency near project sites [9,40]. Concern has also been expressed regarding road damage from the transportation of heavy fracking-related equipment, especially so in regions that lack funding for road repairs [9,40,52].
There is also concern among some people about the chemicals used during the extraction process that may cause adverse effects on human health [53,54]. More specifically, exposure to hydraulic fracturing is seen as related to a variety of health symptoms and illness, both in the short- and long-term, including respiratory problems, headache, sore eyes, gastric discomfort, hypertension, mental disturbances, joint disease, cardiovascular disease, infertility, cancer, and even HIV infections [2,[55], [56], [57], [58], [59]].
There are a number of social risks that have been identified in the literature that relate to quality of life and community [25]. Previous studies have found quality of life to be affected by increased traffic disruption and road impairment [8,9,40]. In addition, local residents are concerned about the strain put on public services due to the influx of workers to support shale gas development [8,42,60]. Moreover, there is great concern about how these newcomers are disrespectful of local culture, as well as associated increases in crime and substance abuse [8,9]. With the influx of new residents, concerns regarding housing are expressed in two ways. First, people are concerned about housing shortages and increasing housing price. Particularly, among those living on a fixed income who may be forced to move away as housing has become unaffordable [61]. Conversely, those who live close to the drilling sites are concerned about declining property values driven by industrialization of the local community [62,63].
The body of evidence in the decision science literature suggests a variety of factors influence judgments about risks [64,65]. Here we review two categories of factors found to influence risk perceptions towards shale gas development [8,9]: internal (e.g., experience, knowledge, institutional trust) and external (e.g., geographic proximity, development) characteristics.
Research in the domain of natural hazards consistently finds that people who have lived through an event such as flooding [66] and volcanic eruptions [67] hold higher levels of risk perceptions, particularly if the event was severe or resulted in bad outcomes [[68], [69], [70]]. Indeed, depending on the severity of the impacts experienced, people who have experienced severe consequences expect the likelihood of future events to be higher and the consequences as being more severe [71]. However, if the personal consequences of an event were mild then risk perceptions are lower [72,73].

More direct evidence has been provided in relation to the complex role that experience plays in risk perceptions. On one hand, prior experience with negative impacts associated with shale gas development such as earthquakes and water shortages has been found to result in higher risk perception among Californian residents [74]. Moreover, prior negative experience, even if unrelated (e.g., landslide), has also been found to enhance public risk perception toward shale gas development in China [75]. On the other hand, experience related to extraction industry development has been found to attenuate risk perception toward shale gas development [76,77]
2.3.2. Knowledge
Studies in decision sciences suggest that knowledge influences risk perceptions [78,79]. The majority of prior studies use self-reported knowledge rather than an objective measure such as through observation or a formal evaluation [80]. Although actual knowledge differs greatly from self-assessed knowledge, the latter is also deemed as a critical factor influencing risk perceptions [81].With respect to risk perceptions about shale gas development, the measurement of knowledge varies widely across studies, from basic knowledge of fracking (e.g., [76]) to self-reported familiarity with hydraulic fracturing (e.g., [82]), and from familiarity with the processes of produced water storage and transportation (e.g., [83]) to specific knowledge about certain impacts (e.g., [8]). For example, Yu et al. [76] conclude that respondents’ knowledge of shale gas technology is positively associated with their risk perception. Brasier et al. [8] find that self-reported knowledge of environmental impacts of shale gas development is a positive predictor of risk perceptions, while knowledge of economic opportunities and social impacts is a negative predictor of risk perceptions.
2.3.3. Institutional trust
People rely on experts, regulators, and operators to manage the risks of emerging technologies, particularly those with a high level of complexity. Trust in experts has been examined extensively among all players in relation to risk perceptions. Researchers postulate that people use expert opinion as a heuristic for their decision making [66], wherein trust in that expert plays a critical role in predicting risk perceptions [85,86]. However, the explanatory power of trust is conditioned on the absence of other key factors such as familiarity with the risk at hand and knowledge [84]. People get their cues about risk from experts that inform their perceptions, but a lack of institutional trust is also related with increased perceived risk under certain circumstances. The relationship between trust in regulators and operators and risk perceptions has also been discussed in a few studies in the shale gas domain. For example, Willems et al. [55] finds mistrust of the government and oil and gas companies is associated with greater perceived health risks associated with shale gas development. Yu et al. [76] find that trust in both local government and operators is negatively associated with risk perceptions toward shale gas development in China, while trust in the central government is positively associated with risk perceptions.
3.1. Interview protocol
A semi-structured interview protocol was developed following the ‘mental models’ approach [91], which allows participants to express views using their own expressions and terms. The initial interview protocol was piloted with six rural residents in March 2016 in Weiyuan County. Based on these pilot interviews, the protocol was revised to match the natural language and terminology more familiar to the participants.

Participants were first asked two undirected questions about shale gas development: (1) “Could you please tell me what you know about shale gas in general” and (2) “Could you please tell me everything about the shale gas well in your village?” Participants were then encouraged to elaborate on everything that came to mind. This was followed by more specific open-ended questions related to shale gas development, including: (3) knowledge, (4) perceived risks, (5) perceived benefits, (6) management of risks, (7) communication of risks, (8) and protective behaviors. Interviewers asked additional questions about other related topics that arose in the first half of the interview, as appropriate. To mitigate any potential order effects, approximately half of the participants received the protocol where they were asked first about benefits and then about risks, with the rest being asked about risks and then benefits.

3.2. Participants
Participants were recruited through a combination of snowball sampling and assistance from those interviewed during the pilot phase. Criteria for inclusion included: participants must reside in close proximity to a shale gas development project from its beginning, or have resided in close proximity should the project be complete, to ensure that the participant has or had substantive exposure (Fig. 1); participants must not themselves and/or have friends or family members currently employed by petroleum and natural gas companies, to reduce potential biases in participants’ responses. A total of 25 individuals were interviewed when a saturation point was achieved that little new information could be obtained from additional participants [92].

Because the majority of participants were unable to understand and/or speak Mandarin, all of the interviews were conducted by four well-trained interviewers who spoke local dialect, which was key to establishing trust with participants. Interviews generally took place in participants’ homes in April of 2016. Interviews lasted for 50 min (ranging from 29 to 68 min) on average, were audio-recorded, and transcribed verbatim for analysis. The length of transcript per interview ranged from 4312 to 11,355 words (in Chinese character), with all the transcripts totaled 187,175 words. Interviewers also took notes during the interview to supplement the audio recordings. Participants were compensated 67 RMB ($10 USD 2018) for their time.

The median age of our participants was 53 years old, with approximately 64% of them being female. This gender and age distribution is quite common in rural China, where local young people, particularly men, tend to migrate to bigger cities for better job opportunities, leaving their children and parents at home. Of our participants, 32% reported having no education, 44% had 6 years or less, 20% completed Junior High School, and 4% completed High School. The majority of our participants were farmers (88%). 36% of the participants lived near shale gas development sites that were ongoing, with the rest residing near sites that were completed. Most of participants lacked access to information related to shale gas development, while only 4% used Internet to acquire information of interest. On average, participants’ self-reported distance from their residence to the nearest shale gas well was 1.21 km (ranging from 0.09 to 3.9 km). (See Appendix A for details about the demographics.)

3.3. Data analysis
A thematic analysis was conducted to analyze the interview transcripts [93,95], a commonly used approach for processing these types of data [21]. These data were coded by three coders employing the constant comparison method [94]. First, they coded four transcripts together and reached agreement on the coding scheme. Second, the coders developed a list of codes (e.g., perceived risk*, perceived benefit*, attitude, protective behaviors) and associated sub-codes (e.g., perceived risks of water pollution, perceived benefits for themselves, attitude toward local exploitation, attitude toward distant exploitation). In developing the coding scheme, some codes were directly derived from the semi-structured questions, for example, “protective behaviors” while some other codes emerged from interviewees, for example, “perceived environmental equity.” Finally, each coder then coded seven additional interviews independently. There was strong agreement between the coders, with a Cohen’s κ of .93. (See Appendix B for the complete coding scheme.)

4. Results
4.1. Risk perceptions
Participants were concerned about the environmental impacts of shale gas development, and subsequent effects on health. They were also concerned about the operational risks of shale gas development, which may also result in impacts on the health of both residents and workers. Interviewees’ perception of risks and exposure pathways regarding shale gas development is illustrated in Appendix C.

4.1.1. Environmental risks
4.1.1.1. Water pollution
4.1.1.1.1. Groundwater
More than half (52%) of the participants thought shale gas development contaminated groundwater – their primary source of drinking water. Indeed, many argued that water quality has declined since the development began. Mrs. Yu (46 years old) said, “I believe my well water has been heavily polluted by the shale gas development.” All referred to the same specific experienced by a local resident, as described by Mr. Chen (53 years old):
…as chemicals have been put into the shale gas well over a long period of time, the well water that we drink has been less clear than before. So someone in this village took [a] water sample for testing, and it turned out the water quality was problematic.


Some participants (16%) cited their own personal observation of impurities in the water as evidence of it being polluted. Mr. Liu (50 years old) said, “I never found fouling in my water [before], but now an entire layer of white fouling floats in boiled water.” Moreover, these participants tended to see closer proximity to a well as being associated with more pollution. For example, Mr. Liu (50 year old) said, “the pollution near the well is extremely severe.” Others also see rain as contributing to the severity of pollution.

4.1.1.1.2. Surface water
Fewer participants (8%) mentioned impacts on surface water. These participants cited specific examples from their own experience. Mrs. Yu said, “…only a small fraction of fish die during the summer when the temperature rises, but last year more than 1100 pounds of fish suddenly died due to surface water pollution.” Others described the irrigation water “an oily fluid” after the shale gas development began as an indicator of surface pollution (Mrs. Huang, 65 years old). Mrs. Huang lamented that “the irrigation water reserved in our cropland was polluted.” Despite this, others were adamant that shale gas development made no contribution to surface water pollution as wastewater was stored in ponds specifically designed for containment. Still others thought that surface water pollution didn’t matter even if it did come from development, since “pollution in drinking water and air…[is more closely related to human health than surface water pollution].”

4.1.1.1.3. Duration of the impacts of water pollution
Participants differed in their views on the duration of water pollution among those who see it as related to shale gas development. Most (16%) saw lasting effects, “wastewater will impact human health chronically” (Mrs. He, 51 years old). Others (8%) saw impacts disappear after operations cease, “[the] effect of water pollution should only be for a short term. After it [wastewater] is hauled away, water pollution is basically reserved” (Mrs. Pu, 31 years old).

4.1.1.1.4. No pollution or hazard
Some participants (20%) did not see a connection between shale gas development and water pollution. One expressed belief centers on the mitigating effects of dilution and physical barriers: “Think about it. The river can dilute wastewater. Now…the well is about 65 feet deep. How [can] the wastewater above the ground possibly leak into the ground?” (Mrs. Zeng, 42 years old) Another belief was that the wastewater was taken away, so pollution was not possible: “wastewater poses no harm [to] plants or [the] environment because it has been hauled away” (Mr. Tang, 62 years old).

4.1.1.2. Air pollution
4.1.1.2.1. Smoke and smell
Many participants (76%) indicated that shale gas development led to air pollution. People complained mostly about the things they could see or smell. Indeed, people saw air pollution (whether that be smoke or smell) as harmful to human health: “feeble men were more likely to become sick, and a few plants were dead since the beginning of the fracking” (Mr. Zhou, 77 years old). Participants reported that the pollution came during flaring, “sometimes the [flaring] fire was kept burning for a few hours. We went close to the fire and saw the flame was as wide as two meters, reaching two to three people’s height” (Mr. Liu, 50 years old). Flaring results in visible pollution, “whenever the flaring occurs, a tremendous amount of smoke rises up in the air” (Mr. Chen, 61 years old). It also causes bad smells: “when the gases are burn[ing], it seems; as soon as the burning ceases, …[the smell] is gone” (Mr. Luo, 67 years old). In addition, pollution occurs because of the oil burned to operate the shale gas development machinery: “during drilling, the machines running on diesel produce lots of smoke” (Mr. Tang, 62 years old). It also causes bad smells: “…the oil smells very bad…whenever the machines are in operation, we smell it” (Mrs. Yu, 46 years old). Finally, the pollution occurs as a result of burning solid waste: “[the solid waste] was transported to piles of regular household garbage in the village, and burned together. We smelled the stink both at home and outside, very stinky” (Mrs. Huang, 65 years old).

4.1.1.2.2. Duration of the impacts of air pollution
Participants’ (25%) views on the lasting impact of air pollution appeared to center on concerns related to bad smells, “the smell is an issue during flaring” (Mrs. Tang, 43 years old). Moreover, the threat from air pollution may resolve after a project is over, since “it depends on whether the smell remains after the well is sealed” (Mrs. Chen, 48 years old).

4.1.1.3. Noise pollution
More than half (59%) of the participants reported that fracking causeed noise pollution. All saw closer proximity as resulting in more noise, and especially at night, as Mr. Tang (62 years old) said, “my home is more than 1300 feet away from the well so we don’t hear the noise. But those living nearby the well couldn’t sleep at all.” People see noise occurring due to drilling activities, “[the] noise will be gone once the drilling is completed” (Mrs. Tang, 43 years old), as well as due to flaring, “…it’s so painful when it burns, making thundery and deafening noises” (Mr. Liu, 50 years old). However, the noise can be something that one can get used to: “the noise [of fracking] occurs suddenly and occasionally. It became acceptable after I got used to it but someone who can’t stand the noise suffer[s] more” (Mrs. Tang, 43 years old).

4.1.1.4. Soil contamination
About 21% of the participants thought shale gas development contaminated the soil, with several suggesting that this was due to inappropriate disposal of waste. One-third attributed soil contamination to wastewater (“the wastewater permeated [from disposal in pits] into the soil, causing pollution to the soil” (Mrs. Yu, 46 years old)), while the rest thought it came from chemical residues in solid waste that had been buried underground (“there is much toxic mud underneath [the ground]” (Mrs. Huang, 65 years old)). The participants, the majority of whom are subsistence farmers, expressed concern about the impacts of soil contamination on their crops. Some (13%) thought soil contamination caused “soil infertility,” interrupting farming activities and severely affecting livelihoods. They feared that contamination would last a long time, as expressed by one participant, “they buried the discarded mud below our soil. Its effects last a lifetime. The contaminated land cannot grow any crop except corn” (Mrs. Huang, 65 years old).

4.1.2. Operational risks
Participants expressed worries about the development and operation of shale gas, including accidents, explosions, spills, and fires due to flaring. With respect to accidents, Mr. Liu (50 years old) lamented that those who work for the developer “…park their trucks at the curve [and] this will put other drivers in danger.” Another participant worried about dangers to young children; “the reservoir that stores wastewater has no fences around it at all. This puts children who play around the reservoir in danger” (Mrs. Tang, 43 years old). A few participants (8%) worried about explosions. For example, Mr. Tang (62 years old) said, “when the pressure inside the gas pipelines increases [to a certain degree], it will explode…if someone is working next to the pipelines, he or she will be injured for sure.” A few participants (8%) were also concerned about gas spills, which could be life-threatening: “once the gas spill occurs it will cause deathly effects immediately. People will be suffocated” (Mrs. Gong, 40 years old). Finally, one participant was concerned that flaring might adversely affect his crops. “Look, they are currently burning it over there. What a large fire! This fire burns as high as this house. Our crops are affected by the heat. (Mr. Ni, 50 years old).

4.1.3. Health risks
4.1.3.1. Cancer
Cancer was a major health concern among participants, with people attributing it to shale gas development. Mrs. Ni (47 years old) said:
Since the beginning of shale gas exploitation, lots of people have got cancers. The esophagus and lung cancer are the most prevalent, followed by liver and lymph cancer. Almost every age group has victims of cancers, but the majority are young people. On average, the number of people in the village [found with] cancer annually ranges from 10 to 20. Last year, 4 people in the neighboring production team died of cancer.


People pointed out how unusual this was, as put by Mr. Liu (50 years old), “in the past, my parents, grandparents, and other forefathers were all well-known for longevity – they live[d] till their 80 s and 90 s. But now the prevalence of cancers in our village is so high! They [developers] have harmed us!” Some participants thought the “powerful chemical[s]” used during drilling are “carcinogenic” and people chronically exposed to these chemicals through ingesting contaminated drinking water “would end up with cancer” (Mrs. He, 51 years old).

4.1.3.2. Other illnesses
Ingesting contaminated water may also contribute to increases in other illnesses. Of this, Mrs. Ni (47 years old), said, “lots of people in our village often get colds. I don’t know whether this has something to do with the polluted water.” Air pollution was seen by some (24%) as being connected with increases in respiratory illnesses among residents. For example, “when they [workers] burn the gas, it can impact our health, making us cough badly” (Mr. Liu, 50 years old). Bad smells associated with development also are seen as causing “headaches and insomnia” (Mrs. Yu, 46 years old), as well as “vomit[ing]” in more extreme cases (Mrs. Ni, 47 years old). Participants (36%) also made connection between noise pollution and insomnia. As said by Mr. Tang (62 years old), “if you lived less than 600 feet away from the well, you have no chance of getting to sleep at all.” Finally, participants also saw illness resulting from eating food grown in contaminated soil. Mrs. Huang (65 years old) said, “you will get sick if you eat grains yielded from the contaminated soil.”

4.2. Factors influencing risk perceptions
4.2.1. Perceived benefits
Overall, participants acknowledged benefits of shale gas development, either to themselves, to others, or to the society. Notably, fewer participants perceived that the development was beneficial to themselves (28%), both monetarily and socially, than to others (80%) and to society (72%), implying a widespread perception of uneven distribution of benefits. For 12% of the interviewees, the counts of perceived benefits mentioned associated with shale gas development exceeded that of perceived risks.

4.2.1.1. Perceived personal benefits
Social security insurance was frequently mentioned as a form of personal monetary benefit individuals received in exchange for use of their land by the developer. For example, Mr. Wang (72 years old) said, “anyone whose land of more than 0.06 acre is taken is provided with social security insurance that is worth around $150. We’re happy as long as this insurance is secured, even though there are no other compensations or subsidies [for shale gas development].” In contrast, those who received little to no monetary benefits saw high risks. For example, Mr. Liu (50 years old) said,
It does no good on me. I don’t get to use the natural gas. Our entire village relies on firewood for cooking…we farmers shouldn’t become victims of pollution. They should solve this [pollution] problem for us.


A few saw the spillover of social benefits with respect to development, as said by Mrs. Liu (47 years old), “it has pros because our village now has become more livable. I personally prefer living in a livable place. [Development] has no harm, and we locals are in support of it.” Mrs. Jiang (70 years old) said, “[development] can provide us with natural gas as fuels, which is cleaner and more convenient.”

4.2.1.2. Perceived benefits to others
When it came to benefits to others, participants mentioned a more diverse set of benefits than with regard to benefits they see accruing to themselves, including social security insurance provided for people whose land was used for development (36%), abundance of energy source (16%), and extra income for governmental officers (8%). Mrs. Zhong (53 years old), said, “for local people…their lives are secured. After all, they don’t need to worry about their living expenses at all, which is the best thing.”

4.2.1.3. Perceived benefits to society
Participants saw several benefits from development accruing to society, including bolstering national interests (32%), economic development (20%), and energy resources (16%). Participants commonly believed that shale gas would be supplied to the army to ensure national security, as said by Mrs. Liu (53 years old), “our army will use the shale gas to protect our country. Our home can be secured only if our country is secured.” Some participants claimed that shale gas development can incentivize economic growth by “reducing oil price,” “upgrading infrastructure such as road construction,” and “alleviating poverty.” Mrs. Pu (31 years old) said, “Extracting [shale] gas is beneficial to the entire society because we villagers can enjoy the benefits of road construction. Look, the road ahead is newly built by the oil company. It was torn and very bumpy before. I heard they spent lots of money in paving this road [prior to drilling].”

When making statements about perceived benefits to the society, a few participants expressed a strong sense of pride of place that was associated with lower perceived risk. Mr. Wang (71 years old) proudly claimed, “the land surrounding the well pad belongs to my family…[it] is the first shale gas well developed across the entire country!” Moreover, “…the development has brought lots of people to our village. Particularly on the first drilling; cars and decent people were everywhere.”

4.2.2. Experience
4.2.2.1. Negative events
Negative events associated with shale gas development that participants experienced directly, witnessed, or heard about appear to influence perceptions of risk. Examples include fluid waste leaks resulting in large fish die offs (“last year, more than 1000 pounds of fish died!” (Mrs. Yu, 46 years old)); skin ulcerations in children and workers through explosions or prolonged contact with wastewater and solid waste (“…he [truck driver] died after he touched the wastewater carelessly…his mom later told us that he had lots of rash on hands because of the touch” (Mrs. Zeng, 42 years old)); crop die offs (“a [wastewater] pipeline broke [and]…wastewater leaked from it, causing a large amount of crops to die” (Mrs. Zeng, 42 years old)); induced seismicity (“…the quakes happened very frequently in the first two years [of development]…some people’s houses were even cracked by the quakes” (Mrs. Pu, 31 years old)), which people often compared with their experience of the 2008 Sichuan Earthquake (20% mentioned), and spills (“the oil spill happened so we are very scared that it would happen again” (Mrs. Liu, 40 years old).

4.2.2.2. Protective behaviors
Participants who saw protective measures being taken by others expressed higher perceived risks. As mentioned by Mr. Chen (53 years old), “project workers only drink bottled water brought from outside; they never drink our local [well] water. Our water must be problematic.” Conversely, some of those who had taken protective behaviors perceived risks to be lowered to a certain degree. Mrs. Pu (31 years old) said “after filtered by the water purifier, our drinking water should be less polluted.”

4.2.3. Knowledge and information source
4.2.3.1. Knowledge
Many participants had low levels of knowledge and misperceptions about shale gas development. Some participants (36%) reported not knowing what ‘shale gas’ was, the depth of drilling (40%), and/or were unclear about how shale gas was extracted from the well (56%). Those, who didn’t know that shale gas was extracted from a well, assumed that it was some other petroleum product, most often oil (Mr. Zhou, 77 years old), or helium gas. Thus, participants were making inferences about the risks of shale gas and its development based on their understanding of the process and product. Participants were also unsure if the well near to them was in production: “I can’t tell whether that well is producing or not because I don’t walk near it” (Mrs. Chen, 48 years old).

4.2.3.2. Information source
Most of the participants received information about their proximal shale gas development from non-official sources, with the common source being conversations among other villagers (68%), watching TV (20%), talking with project workers (16%), and the Internet (4%). Less common sources of information included reading signs of the well made by PetroChina (28%), asking developers or village leaders (28%), being informed by developers or village leaders (24%), and learning from experts who make inspections (4%). This discrepancy between learning from non-official versus official sources may result from developers and officials communicating by and large only with those people whose land was directly impacted by the project. When that communication did occur, it was done only rarely: “before the drilling stared, the developers once warned surrounding villagers not to enter the project site. But they were gone after the project was done, so I think there is no danger anymore: (Mrs. Liu, 40 years old). Participants reported that local government officials very rarely publicly disclosed information out of concern about the development. Hence, participants reported that they came to their own conclusions about the development based on what information they had at hand.

4.2.3.3. Disempowerment
Nearly half of the participants (40%) expressed they would not seek information about shale gas development as they felt powerless about whether they can change the process or outcome: “it doesn’t matter whether we ordinary villagers know about it or not, because we can do nothing” (Mr. Chen, 53 years old). Another felt like they would not be able to grasp the details of the technology due to the limited education that have received: “I’m undereducated. I’m not capable of learning [about shale gas]” (Mr. Liu, 50 years old).

4.2.4. Individual characteristics and contextual factors
4.2.4.1. Socio-demographics
Approximately 40% of the participants reported knowing very little about shale gas development, in terms of either its risks or benefits. Among those, most were female (70%), had less than 6 years of education (80%), and had a household income of 50 thousand RMB (˜$7700) or less per year (80%). However, those who reported being in poor health (36%) held higher perceived risk than those reporting better health. For example, Mr. Zhou (77 years old) who is in poor health is clearly aware of the exposure pathways of different health-related risks: “the smell is bad for our health…the wastewater causes terrible outcomes particularly when it rains; the overflow of wastewater can spread all over the place…people will get sick if they eat crops grown from…[contaminated] soil.” In contrast, Mr. Chen (61 years old) who is in good health condition appeared to be more tolerant of risks: “air pollution is not a big deal. It is fine because we only breathe a little.”

4.2.4.2. Water source
Participants who relied on wells for drinking water (39%) perceived higher levels of risks associated with water pollution than those who relied on springs. However, their perceived health-related risks decreased once they switched from wells to ‘barreled water’ (“I started to drink purified barreled water since I moved here. Not many people drink this water, but I have no choice. Look what the water from my well looks like: it was almost black!” (Mrs. Ni, 47 years old)) or spring water (“our family used to drink well water, but we have switched to spring for almost three years since we are worried that the wastewater has leaked into our well. Now we are relieved” (Mrs. Liu, 53 years old)). Half the participants (50%) who relied on rivers for irrigation believed that the water was not polluted, as said by Mr. Tang (62 years old), “my crops are all safe. The river is of course not polluted, only the well water is polluted.”

4.2.5. Stages of development: ongoing versus completed projects
Participants living near ongoing projects reported higher levels of perceived risks than those living near completed projects. For example, Mr. Liu (50 years old) living near an active project mentioned nearly all types of risks (Section 4.1) as described during the interviews in vivid detail. Whereas, Mrs. He (51 years old) living near a project that was completed a few years ago said, “…[development] has not caused any adverse impacts. Not at all.”

5. Discussion and conclusions
Echoing the call for research to enhance our understanding towards exceptional stakeholders such as vulnerable populations [95], this study examined the risk perceptions of individuals living in close proximity to shale gas development in rural China, marked by their economic disadvantage and weak links to the outside world. In this context, these individuals feel great pride in where they live and who they are [96]. Unlike previous literature, in many cases our participants placed great spiritual value on shale gas development occurring in their community, which represents not only a sense of pride but also symbolizes national interests, perhaps being more important than any potential personal economic benefit. Part of this view could be due to the fact that nearly all projects in China are developed by state-owned oil and gas companies such as PetroChina and Sinopec, and thus participants equate shale gas projects with national planning of strategic development that is perceived to be of great importance to national security and to residents’ own well-being.

On balance, our participants’ risk perceptions echo many of those already identified in literature, underscoring, perhaps, the universal nature of these concerns. First, consistent with the findings in previous research, our participants tend to rely on sensory cues including smells, visuals, and sounds to evaluate the severity of risks [97,98]. Certain risks that occurred during drilling whose damages are easier to detect (e.g., water, air, noise pollution) are perceived as being more severe than less observable risks (e.g., soil contamination) [99,100]. Second, our research provides additional evidence in support of the association between spatial proximity and risk perception [8,40,48]. Certain risks associated with shale gas development are construed as being more psychologically proximate than others. For instance, participants’ experience pertaining to air, water, and noise pollution serve as concrete peripheral cues that they rely on to make judgement about the magnitude of the risks. Our findings extend previous findings that higher risk perceptions are generally expressed among those who live in proximity to risk; indeed, our participants specifically link perceived severity of air, water and noise pollution to the proximity to shale gas wells, based upon first-hand experience and anecdotal evidence [66]. Lastly, echoing prior findings that people exposed to a certain risk for a long time could become habituated to it, our study reveals that individuals apply such inherent adaptation strategy to bothersome risks from shale gas development, including noise pollution, smells, and even earthquakes [101,102].

Overall, our findings provide new empirical evidence supporting the theory of social amplification of risk, which posits that risk can be amplified or attenuated by interaction between risky events and psychological, social, institutional, and cultural processes [103,104]. While previous studies indicate that experience could either be an amplifier or attenuator of risk, we find prior experience with adverse impacts associated with shale gas extraction mainly intensify perceived levels of risks [[74], [75], [76], [77]]. Our participants felt they could not obtain good information about shale gas from reliable sources, hence they relied on their own individual experience to evaluate potential risks.

One theme observed in the Western world but unobserved in this study are concerns about social impacts [105]. Compared to concerns centering on property values or way of life expressed in the Western world, the affected Chinese public seem to only notice the positive impacts on road construction and vibrancy of the decent people who visit their villages. This could be because social impacts are seen as less threatening than the environmental and health impacts that already threaten residents’ daily lives. Additionally, the influx of workers generally live in portable houses near the project site instead of renting local housing, and hence are not generally seen as displacing or disrupting daily life.

Our findings highlight several gaps in knowledge that developers and public officials may find useful when communicating with the public, including views that surface water is not affected by development or perceptions about how long pollutants linger in the environment. This work presents a window into how people who are directly affected by shale gas development in China view the risk, and the ways they want those risks managed. Thus, the findings offer insights to policymakers on how to design more tailored risk communications and compensation schemes that ultimately enhance understanding and address inequities. For example, the central government rather than the local government, who is generally perceived as untrustworthy, should carefully design and disseminate easily understandable information to residents in proximity to drilling. The information should include the process of shale gas extraction, associated risks and benefits at both the individual and society level, protective behaviors necessary to mitigate various risks, and channels for inquiries and complaints that allow to establish a dynamic feedback loop. Additionally, to ensure the equality among all the affected individuals, a hierarchy of compensation scheme needs to be established according to the degree of economic losses or health impairment. The compensation, preferably distributed to residents directly by operators, can take diversified forms ranging from supplying those inflicted with water pollution with water barrels or purifiers to implementing soil remediation for those inflicted with soil contamination to direct cash payments for fish death and crop damages.

6. Limitations
While our study has its strengths, it also has its limitations. First, our sample size of 25 participants limits the generalizability of our findings. However, this is an exploratory study and the first of its kind in China. Hence, we feel it is important to first conduct an in-depth interview with those individuals directly affected by development in order to reveal perceptions about risks and benefits that may be unique to China, which might be difficult to obtain in a survey with closed-ended response options with a larger number of individuals.

Second, we focus on a population of individuals who are directly affected by development, and not those who are indirectly affected and hence may hold different interests and views. Thus, our findings are not generalizable in this respect to the rest of China, and should be interpreted in that light. Future study could explore differences in perceptions between those in close proximity to shale gas development, and those who live far away.

Third, although our findings highlight that health is potentially linked to risk perceptions, the association between other individual characteristics and the specific types or degree of risk perceptions awaits further investigation. Lastly, future study should include surveys with a greater number of individuals so that generalizations to larger populations, such as the directly affected public or the general public, can be made.

2.3.4. Geographic proximity
Research suggests that people who live closer to a source of risk hold higher risk perceptions [[66], [67], [68]]. When it comes to shale gas development, individual risk perception is associated with geographic proximity to the development [8,40]. Anderson and Theodori find that people believe close proximity to wells is the cause of certain cancers [40]. Similarly, Rabinowitz et al. [87] find that people living in proximity to wells are more inclined to report health symptoms such as respiratory problems than those in more distant areas. The relationship between geographic proximity and specific types of health risks and their perceived association with shale gas development is perhaps more nuanced. Evensen and Stedman [48] find that those living in close proximity to the Marcellus Shale deposit perceive short-term local economic growth and negative impacts associated with development on water, air, and wildlife health as more likely than those who lived farther away.

2.3.5. Development
Researchers find that perceptions towards shale gas development are influenced by two factors related to energy development. The first has to do with the stages of development. For example, as development proceeds, people become habituated to some of the impacts such as noise pollution and their perceived risk on that dimension decreases [8,9]. A second factor has to do with previous energy industry exposure. With some researchers finding that greater exposure results in lower perceived risks and greater perceived benefits [12,88]. Some postulate that this may have more to do with economic benefits that accrue to individuals and local communities, rather than actual lower perceived risks among those with greater exposure [82]. Others find that people with greater exposure express both higher perceived risks and benefits than those with less exposure [40,61].

3. Methods
We conducted in-depth interviews of residents in Weiyuan County, Sichuan Province, China (Fig. 1) where there are extensive shale gas development activities. We employed a thematic analysis of interview transcripts to identify perceived risks and factors influencing those perceptions. Weiyuan County is the first location in China to experience shale gas development, with the first well being completed in 2010 [89]. As of 2018, Weiyuan has 102 ongoing or completed projects [90], nearly all of which have people living in close proximity (approximately 5 km or less from the well). Due to a lack of procedural justice and loose environmental regulations regarding shale gas development in China, residents close to drilling are particularly vulnerable to the various risks posed by development. For example, there have been cases where oil company workers have dumped large quantities of solid waste and wastewater into small landfills in villages in Weiyuan County, exposing unknowing residents to toxic waste. Among the five villages sampled, Laochang and Xigou villages have been pioneers in domestic shale gas extraction since 2009, where China’s first horizontal well was drilled and completed in 2011 [90]. In Yinjia, Maliu, and Wuhuang villages, drilling began in 2015, where a larger amount of densely-distributed wells were being built during the period of our interviews.