Shale gas in the EU and its Member States faces increasing attention from a regulatory perspective. Questions about the role of law regarding the development of shale gas extraction in Europe are being asked. The role of law within science, as Laurie et al. suggest, involves an important decision: “whether the law is an enabler or a prohibitor of technologies” (Laurie, G., Harmon, S.H., Arzuaga, F., ‘Foresighting Futures: Law, New Technologies, and the Challenges of Regulating for Uncertainty’ 4 Law, Innovation and Technology 1 (2012), 1–33, at 10) [1]. At best, the law should promote the development of a technology without unduly compromising the protection of society and the environment from consequences of uncertainties and potential threats of an associated technology (Laurie, G., Harmon, S.H., Arzuaga, F., ‘Foresighting Futures: Law, New Technologies, and the Challenges of Regulating for Uncertainty’ 4 Law, Innovation and Technology 1 (2012), 1–33, at 10) [2]. The principles of precaution and prevention are the two main tools of European law, which shall help to strike a balance between enabling and prohibiting the development of an emerging energy technology like shale gas extraction. This article departs from the perspective that law at EU level is imposing control on the management of “known” risks via the preventive principle. Regarding “uncertainties” or “unknowns”, decision makers are legally obliged to be guided by the precautionary principle. This paper discusses the two environmental law principles – precaution or prevention – and contemplates which of them would be most apt for guiding the regulation of shale gas extraction in Europe. It concludes that regulation on shale gas extraction could be based on either of these principles for different reasons.
Discussions concerning the application of the precautionary or the preventive principle to shale gas extraction tend to focus on one particular question. Are the threats from shale gas extraction not (yet) known or is scientific knowledge about the technology already so advanced that the potential threats are clear. In the former case, the precautionary principle applies, whereas in the later the preventive principle would steer the decision-making processes [3]. The article will discuss the application of the precautionary and/or the preventive principle to the potential environmental threats of shale gas extraction. It concludes that, although both principles are well distinguished at a conceptual level, their practical implications for European decision and rulemaking in the case of shale gas extraction are not very far apart.

As a consequence, it could be argued that drawing a distinction between the precautionary and the preventive principle nowadays is superfluous because the legal consequences of both principles are mainly the same. Preventive measures cover a range of legal instruments, which can be quite similar to those to be taken under the precautionary principle; they include, inter alia, the application of Best Available Techniques (BAT), if they do not entail excessive costs [4], the extension of a special protection status to threatened areas and Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) [5]. The precautionary principle similarly covers these measures, including EIAs and the prescription of safety margins, but any other measure may constitute an appropriate implementation of the precautionary principle [6]. Under both principles, the taken measures must be effective and proportional [7].

Notwithstanding that similarity in practical consequence, it will be shown in this article that the European legislator upholds a distinction between the principles at a conceptual level. Since this decision of the legislator appears to be a conscious one, it must be respected by courts, governments and legal scholars under the principle of separation of powers. Thus, it is necessary to categorize potential threats of shale gas extraction as falling under, either one or the other, the precautionary or the preventive principle.

The term ‘potential threats’ requires some explanations. Usually the term ‘potential threat’ is being replaced by the term ‘risk’. A risk relies on the distinction between reality and possibility and inevitably entails a component of uncertainty [8]. From a linguistic point it is, hence, somewhat ambiguous to group risks into ‘certain’ and ‘uncertain’ risks, as frequently done by legal literature on the precautionary/preventive principle. From the author’s point of view it is more precise to differentiate between ‘threats’ and ‘potential threats’, as the current work will do.

The article proceeds as follows. First, it provides a brief introduction to shale gas development in the European Union. It then attempts to outline both principles and their status in EU law. The article will discuss the underlying argumentation for use of the precautionary and/or preventive principle in European shale gas regulation. Finally, it will touch upon some practical implications of this debate.

2. Shale gas extraction in the European Union
After triggering a ‘gas glut’ in the USA, shale gas extraction is currently arriving in Europe [9]. Several oil and gas companies have already applied for exploratory licences in a number of EU Member States [10]. These applications, however, were met with public resistance in many countries [11]. Societal concerns about the environmental sustainability of shale gas extraction were fuelled by earth tremors in the UK and the media coverage of water contamination in America [12]. Despite these misgivings, domestic shale gas extraction altered the energy security position of the USA, switching the country from gas-importer to gas-exporter status [13]. European countries opting for domestic shale gas production could equally free themselves from the grip of their current gas-suppliers. Thus, two distinct, seemingly contradictory, interests are at stake in the case of shale gas extraction: environmental protection and energy security.

The term shale gas refers to natural gas (mainly methane), which is present in very small pores of organic rich shales [14]. The gas is actually encapsulated between fine grains of shale rock and cannot naturally migrate from the shale layers [14]. Layers of this kind may be found at varying depths, depending on regional geological circumstances; thus, generalizations about ‘shale gas extraction’ have to be made very cautiously, as each well has its unique characteristics [14]. In Europe, shale formations can be found at depths of 2 km or more and they may be as thick as 100 m [14].

Unfortunately the permeability of the shale matrix is very low [15]. Although gas could be produced from the naturally occurring fractures without stimulation, the gas would flow at a very low rate and so stimulation becomes key to the economic viability of a shale gas well [16]. This characteristic of low matrix permeability, thus, represents a key difference between shale and other gas reservoirs [17].

Two different technologies are required for industry-scale shale gas extraction: first, innovative/horizontal drilling and second, hydraulic fracturing [18]. After the well has been successfully established by innovative drilling technologies, a second step is required to actually extract shale gas: hydraulic fracturing [19]. Hydraulic fracturing distinguishes itself from the above mentioned processes insofar as it is not a drilling method, but a stimulation treatment of an existing shale gas well [20]. It aims to enlarge the naturally occurring fissures in the shale layer and to create additional ones to allow the gas to flow more readily [21].

Hydraulic fracturing cannot only be deployed for shale gas extraction: it may be used for all sorts of oil and gas extraction and even for geothermal purposes [22]. In fact, deployment for these other purposes is not a new development. Hydraulic fracturing was initially developed and introduced for these uses in America by 1949 [23].

The difference between conventional and unconventional gas is the ability of the gas to migrate in situ: conventional gas makes its way from the source rock into layers of reservoir rock and gathers in naturally occurring reservoirs or traps, formed by caps of supervening impermeable rock. Engineers accordingly tap into these reservoirs to extract conventional gas, which flows with comparative ease from the reservoir rock as a result of its permeability [24].

Unconventional gas, however, is trapped in the source rock and does not migrate without stimulation; the ‘unconventional bit’ is, hence, the low permeability of the source rock [25]. Besides shale, several other rocks in Europe may ‘host’ unconventional gas, most prominently coal and sandstone [26]. However, the production methods for the extraction of most types of unconventional gas are quite similar, since the ‘trapping’- rocks are all low permeability structures [27].

Concerning the actual exploration process, the crucial difference between conventional and unconventional gas extraction is that for the exploration of conventional gas reservoirs, gas does not necessarily has to be extracted (although it might in some cases) [28]. By contrast, shale gas exploration inevitably has a necessity to apply hydraulic fracturing to the target layer to know whether or not economically viable shale gas reserves are present. The fact that potential threats might already arise during the exploration phase brings the regulation of these potential threats by the precautionary or the preventive principle into focus.

3. The status of the precautionary and preventive principle in EU environmental law
The precautionary and preventive principle are both central principles, not only of international [29] but also European environmental law. The precautionary, just like the preventive principle, seeks to protect the environment as an end in itself [30]. The precautionary principle is derived from the German ‘Vorsorgeprinzip’ [31]. The precautionary principle aims to help law and policy makers to reach decisions in cases where scientists are uncertain as to the potential environmental impacts of a given activity [32]. The European Commission elaborated a ‘Communication on the Precautionary Principle’ in February 2000 [33]. This Communication lays out the EU’s approach to the application and interpretation of the precautionary principle. Although it is not a legally binding document [34], the European Court of Justice ruled that it represents a codification of the law and may therefore be deemed as a valid legal position [35].

The Communication points out that under the precautionary principle, human, animal and plant health are protected in their own rights [36]. That opens a window of opportunity to deploy the precautionary principle for the regulation of potential environmental threats emanating from shale gas activities. The Communication suggests a two-step approach to precaution: first, the plausibility of a threat must be established by assessing and categorizing issues and potential threats, which a certain activity could bring about [37]. Second, the identified potential threats shall then be combated by appropriate protective measures [38]. Since this article is concerned with the conceptual categorization of potential threats of shale gas extraction and an adequate regulatory response to these threats, it will merely discuss the first step – assessment. It is, however, important to acknowledge that the second step – protective measures – is of far bigger relevance in practice and may well turn out to be even more difficult than the first step.

The second environmental law principle with relevance to shale gas extraction is the preventive principle, which is often confused with precaution [39]. It was introduced in 1987 through the Single European Act, thus predating the precautionary principle. The precautionary principle applies to potential risks, i.e. risks that cannot be qualified or quantified as of yet because of a lack of scientific data or knowledge. By contrast, the preventive principle is referred to in situations where the likelihood of a threat occurring is quantifiable; the time and extent of the impact or damage not being known, however. The preventive principle is included along with the precautionary principle in Article 191 (2) Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). In contrast to the precautionary principle, the preventive principle is an undisputed principle of public international law [40]. It is also a customary rule of international law [41].

Its status is established and well recognized, as opposed to the principle of precaution [42]. The very existence of the principle of prevention is an application of sic utere tuo ut alienum non laedas, as recognized for example in the Trail Smelter arbitration [43]. At the European level, before being included in the 1987 Single European Act, the principle was already apparent in various Environmental Action Programmes, starting with the first one in 1972.

As outlined above, the principle does not address potential risks on the grounds of scientific uncertainty, but risks that are known and likely to occur while carrying out a certain activity (or as a result of inaction) [44]. However, similar to the precautionary principle, the application of the preventive principle is subject to two main thresholds, namely the actual relationship between probability and the extent of damage on the one hand and a cost-benefit analysis on the other [45]. The former aims at ensuring that the risk is considered with the required due diligence and ensures that a balance is struck with regard to the level and intensity of intervention and prevention [45]. The latter, cost-benefit analysis, ensures that the risk is balanced with the economic effects of regulatory intervention (or the lack thereof), in the mid- as well as long-term [46].

Both principles, however, lack an explicit definition in European law, which renders their practical application and distinction difficult [47]. Both principles oblige Member States and the European Union to anticipate, reduce and, as far as possible, cut off at their origin, sources of pollution or nuisances through the adaptation of measures intended to eliminate so called ‘known risks’ [48]. Thus, prevention, just like precautionary measures do not depend on the actual occurrence of ecological damage; they shall also anticipate harm [49].

But the issue is not limited to the EU, it is of general nature in international law. As the preventive and the precautionary principle are closely related to each other, the line of distinction between them has increasingly been blurred [50]. Many international treaties only refer to the precautionary principle without explicitly invoking the preventive principle, although they are actually aiming to address both principles at the same time [51].

3.1. The concept of scientific uncertainty
Despite this recent trend to use precaution and prevention in an almost interchangeable sense scientific uncertainty has frequently been described as the ‘watershed’ between prevention and precaution [52]. Where reasonable grounds of concern for the existence of an environmental threat can be established, but the existence of the threat is yet uncertain, the precautionary principle applies [53]. Precautionary logic means to act as soon as alarm bells are triggered, even if ‘certainty’ about a threat is not yet available [54].

By contrast, the preventive principle applies when the source of a threat may be reliably identified [55] and the existence of the threat can be deemed certain [56], but the point in time when damage materializes, remains unknown [57] (‘if’, ‘how’ and ‘when’). The preventive principle, thus, applies where a good deal is known about a potential environmental threat, at least so much that a threat exists and that, in light of the knowledge about that threat, prevention is in order [58]. Threats are certain when irrefutable scientific proof demonstrates causation of damage by an event [59]. Therefore, a causal link between the initial event and its adverse effect is required.

But how exactly can scientific uncertainty be established in practice and what distinguishes uncertainty from scientific uncertainty? Only finding an answer to that question makes it possible to appraise the (potential) environmental threats in the context of shale gas extraction. Types of scientific uncertainty in relation to different environmental problems differ considerably. The same is true for the language used among different scientific disciplines to address uncertainty [60], which makes an appraisal of uncertainty a particularly tricky task from a legal perspective. Scientists, for example, focus more on uncertainties in scientific research, things that cannot be measured in a known, repeatable way. The judiciary, however, uses ‘uncertainty’ as well for areas where significant disagreement on particular findings persists [61]. Significant disagreement among scientists on particular findings would, thus, be an indicator in law for the existence of scientific uncertainty [62].

But this criterion is not very fertile, given the fact that even with established facts, a minority of scientists might always argue against them; that is to say controversy and uncertainty might overlap [63]. One study might conclude “in all certainty” that something is true and another study might state the contrary, but as well “in all certainty” [64]. Furthermore, issues might occur due to funding by external stakeholders, with the aim that the study produces a particular result or the scientist conducting the research might be biased in her or his own views [65].

A debate concerning the nature of uncertainty emerged under the umbrella of the conceptual definition of the precautionary principle. It resulted in the observation that precautionary decisions must be based on the best information available, regardless of whether or not scientific [66], but if scientific evidence is available it has to be given priority over other accumulated evidence as a basis of decisions [67]. The argument put forward in the EU in general is that scientific uncertainty may in practice be established by tests and that other, non-scientific, uncertainty neither warrants the application of the precautionary principle nor that of the preventive principle [68].

We need to find out what these tests for scientific uncertainty look like to be able to gauge whether or not scientific uncertainty about certain phenomena that have been observed in the context of shale gas extraction exists. Several attempts, especially in US literature, have been made to elaborate a clear catalogue of criteria as to how scientific uncertainty can be established. Often these criteria differ considerably in their number and names, but they essentially express a similar line of reasoning [69].

An attempt to categorize scientific uncertainty that can be considered beneficial for the purpose of this work, is a structure proposed by Vern R. Walker. Walker not only systemizes scientific uncertainty into 5 clear and distinct groups, he also assesses these groups of scientific uncertainty in a way that makes them easy to operate for legal scientists. His approach, therefore, appears most appropriate to incorporate uncertainty into legal decision-making. No other framework found in the literature addresses so clearly both the nature of scientific uncertainty and its relevance to legal decision-making.

According to Walker, science cannot work as a neutral arbiter for triggering precautionary or preventive measures because the process of discovering and warranting (potential) threats inherently requires non-scientific decisions [70]. It can, thus, never be a purely scientific act to find a threat that triggers precaution/prevention, since deciding that a particular finding about a threat is warranted, given the evidence, cannot be a policy-neutral determination [70]. Uncertainty, according to Walker, means a potential for error in drawing an inference; new data and new evidence can reduce, but not altogether eliminate uncertainty [71].

Determining that the available scientific evidence warrants a finding of threat requires varying decisions which, in themselves, carry some uncertainties. Walker splits these into 5 groups: conceptual uncertainty, measurement uncertainty, sampling uncertainty, modelling uncertainty and causal uncertainty [72].
a)
Conceptual uncertainty: Scientists select variables that they hope will produce measurements that shall prove predictive and explanatory, but decisions about what and how to study are always made in a pragmatic context. Funding bodies or professional journals have their preferences and they influence conceptual choices [73]. The (here indeed) risk is that variables are chosen from which non-instructive results infer. All that is possible is to attempt to ensure that an extensive array of the most relevant theories and disciplines are represented when decisions are being taken [74].

b)
Measurement uncertainty: Measuring is the process of generating data for a scientific study [74]. Measurement uncertainty can be further split into reliability issues and validity issues [74]. The taken measurements are unreliable when the process of repeatedly measuring the same object by the same measurement process yields inconsistent results [75].

c)
Sampling uncertainty: Science often wants to generalize about events, which have, as yet gone unmeasured. The method pursued is often to take samples and infer from the measurements conclusions concerning the system as a whole e.g. concerning ‘the population’ [76]. However, the sample may not adequately represent the whole and hence, sampling uncertainty can occur via generalizations [77]. Whether or not a generalization is warranted depends on the nature of the studied events [78].

d)
Modelling uncertainty: In addition to recording observed values for variables and generalizing them, scientists use mathematics to relate multiple variables. Values for one variable are expressed as a mathematical function of values for other variables [79]. Using different parameters or different models, formulae will produce different predictions with different levels of precision and accuracy. Such uncertainties are similar to the issues of reliability and validity [80].

e)
Causal uncertainty: Causal relationships are required to explain why a measured event occurred. Two distinct events can occur together without one causing the other – barometric changes, for instance, do not cause weather patterns [81]. The mere statistical correlation between two variables does not entail causation between the variables [82]. Some events, which remain unstudied, might in fact counteract or mask the causal action [82]. The causal patterns in complex ecosystems are very difficult to determine and controlled experiments are not always feasible. Often, the best available evidence results from field studies with conclusions subject to significant causal uncertainty [82].


As a consequence of this assessment it must now be established if the scientific evidence concerning adverse effects on the environment by shale gas extraction already amounts to certainty about the environmental threat. Alternatively, it might be assessed that scientific uncertainty still prevails. The observations in the next section apply Walker’s system to shale gas development in the EU. We suggest that they might be of wider use as a general template to counter the perceived “haziness” [83] in the distinction between the two principles of prevention and precaution.

4. Shale gas extraction in the European Union: precaution or prevention?
Up until today, the only specific regulatory instrument on shale gas in the European Union is a non-binding Recommendation by the European Commission, outlining minimum principles [84]. This Recommendation is accompanied by a Commission Communication [85] and a Commission Staff Working Document [86] providing background information to the Recommendation.

Start with the Commission’s Recommendation, it is surprising to find that this document neither includes a reference to ‘precaution’ nor to ‘prevention’. Given the controversial debate in science, politics, the general public as well as in law on shale gas extraction and about the uncertainties involved, this could have been expected. The omission is also remarkable when considering the fact that the preamble of the Recommendation otherwise refers to rather comprehensive sets of general principles and rights, such as the ‘right to life and the right to the integrity of the person, the freedom of expression and information, the right to conduct a business, the right to property, and [indeed] the high-level of health and environmental protection’ [87].

The Commission’s Communication at least refers to ‘precaution’: twice in unfolding the public concerns associated with the technology [88] and once in stating that the current applicable legal framework to the activity is fragmented [89]. The Commission, thus, merely recognises the concerns in the Communication but does not take them up in the actual Recommendation.

The Commission Staff Working Document contains several references to both principles, but without a clear line of argumentation and differentiation. It even seems to confuse these two principles when stating that: “[i]n order to reassure the public and to follow a precautionary approach, preventive measures are more adapted and would be more effective if targeted at the sources of the problems, also entailing that the same measure could act on several problems” [90].

This unspecific use of language leads to the question whether or not there actually still exists a necessity to maintain two distinct principles. Due to the rapid development of the precautionary principle during the last few years, and its ever-broadening area of application it has been argued that the precautionary principle in international law has “absorbed” the preventive principle and that it therefore has no longer a distinct legal meaning [91].

While that might or might not be true for international law, it is certainly not the case for European law, as a brief look at art. 191 (2) TFEU indicates. Here, both principles are enumerated explicitly as distinct principles. If the legislator would have been of the opinion that the precautionary principle has already “absorbed” the preventive principle, s/he would not have implemented art. 191 (2) TFEU in its current form. Art. 191 (2) TFEU follows up on its predecessors art. 130r of the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community and art. 174 (2) of the Treaty establishing the European Community, which already entailed the distinction between the preventive and the precautionary principle. An assessment of both paragraphs by the UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs stated that art. 191 TFEU is “in substance the same as Article 174 TEC” [92]. The legislator hence upheld the distinction of both principles in a recent law reform at the European level, despite the absorption-idea currently dominating international law. The EC-Treaty and now the TFEU are not the only EU laws that clearly distinguish between the two principles [93]. The multitude of citable documents in this regard is evidence to a conscious decision of legislators to distinguish between the principles. The implication is that this decision must be respected by users of the law.

The critics of the distinction between the two principles in EU law concede that the distinction is enshrined in European law and that this is unlikely to change as long as residues of art. 174 (2) EC Treaty survive in current law [94]. The wording of a law, here art. 191 (2) TFEU must constitute the ultimate definition for its interpretation by users of law. An interpretation of both principles as being one would hence contradict current law.

An interesting example for the difficulties in assessing whether or not the potential threats of shale gas extraction fall into the realms of precaution or prevention has been provided by the French Parliament in 2011. When the shale gas debate reached France, the government decided not to approve applications for shale gas extraction permits, putting in place a ‘political moratorium’ (meaning that it was based on an informal understanding amongst government ministers) [95]. Despite this early action, protests against shale gas extraction gathered momentum and, on 16th April, 2011, inhabitants of many French arrondissements (local districts) took to the streets [96]. They demanded the formal outlawing of shale gas extraction [97]. After intense discussions law no. 2011-835 [98], which formally orders a moratorium on unconventional oil and gas extraction by hydraulic fracturing [99], was finally passed on 21st June, 2011 by the French National Assembly [100] and, on 30th June, 2011, by the Senate [101].

One of the most contentious points in the respective parliamentary debates was the question of whether shale gas extraction had to be regulated under the preventive or the precautionary principle [102].

Initially it was agreed that the precautionary principle should be used as the most authoritative guideline for decision making on shale gas in France [103]. However, the subjection of shale gas extraction to the precautionary principle proved to be controversial in the French parliament.

A vocal minority [104] of French MPs considered the potential environmental and health risks of shale gas extraction as proven and consequently wanted to apply the preventive principle [105]. The dispute among French MPs became so important that it was only settled by explicit inclusion of a reference into law no. 2011-835 (the French moratorium) that it is based equally on the 2004 Environmental Charter (Charte de l'environnement de 2004) and on article l. 110-1 of the French Environmental Code [106], that is, on both the precautionary and the preventive principle [107]. Thus, the application of the two principles within the shale gas (regulatory) debate is far from clear and straightforward. The following section will outline the underlying argumentation for use of each of the principles.

4.1. Pleadings for precaution
Five potential environmental threats of shale gas extraction have been identified as most salient in the European context. These are: groundwater contamination, irresponsible disposal of ‘flow-back’, the repercussions of excessive land use in densely populated European countries and emission of greenhouse gases [108]. In addition, there is a fifth threat, the possible causation of earth tremors, which received much media attention [109]. These five (potential) threats are now going to be scrutinized with regards to their certainty or uncertainty. Then, Walker’s methodology on the establishment of scientific uncertainty [109] will be employed to categorize and appraise the ensuing results. This approach reveals that scientific uncertainty concerning potential environmental threats of shale gas extraction in Europe currently prevails in regulatory and legal thinking.

Some US evidence with regards to groundwater contamination suggests, but does not conclusively prove, that a link between shale gas extraction and groundwater contamination could exist [110]. Other studies established in recent years that hydraulic fracturing is in fact likely to pose no real threat to the groundwater [111]. Arguably, the most authoritative and comprehensive study has been conducted by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) [112], which looked into the hydraulic fracturing of Coal Bed Methane (CBM) [113] and concluded that hydraulic fracturing poses little or no threat to the groundwater [114].

To give an example from the European area: small scale monitoring of exploration drills in Germany did, similarly, not produce any evidence for an environmental threat [115], although the German scientists stressed that large detailed studies are required to validate these results [116].

To sum up, inconclusive evidence for groundwater contamination by shale gas extraction exists. Despite the fact that plausible scenarios of environmental threats can be constructed, no conclusive link between shale gas extraction and groundwater contamination has so far been established by scientists. Thus, the threat to the groundwater remains uncertain.

The very same is true for the other four major potential threats of shale gas extraction in Europe. With regards to ‘flow-back’ disposal, the US Department of Environmental Protection reported 130 incidents of groundwater and soil contamination from spills of ‘flow back’ since 2008 [117]. In America, however, the majority of ‘flow back’ is being recycled, requiring on site storage [118]. Leakage from these storage basins has been identified as a major source of contamination [119]. In Europe this method is not likely to used [120]. Due to these technological differences between the American and the European way to dispose of ‘flow back’, the US experiences cannot be transferred to Europe. The Rosenwinkel report [121], a special survey on deep-ground injection of ‘flow back’ in Germany, for instance, concluded that “the effects (…) and possible hazards for water and environmental resources [by disposal of ‘flow back’] are not adequately investigated or documented” [122]. Thus ‘flow back’-disposal is currently surrounded by uncertainty and further research is required.

The discussion on land use and greenhouse gas emissions centres on the question if and how coal could be replaced by shale gas as a fossil fuel [123]. The effects of substituting coal with shale gas are intensely discussed amongst scientists and contradicting studies highlight the need for holistic research, taking a wide range of potential effects into account [124]. Some studies conclude that well leakage is low, and greenhouse benefits can arise from gas extraction. Others found higher leakage rates, which suggest a net loss in greenhouse emission abatement in switching from coal to gas [124]. A fierce scientific debate is occurring, and the effects of shale gas extraction on greenhouse gas emissions and land use are still surrounded by uncertainty.

Finally, the issue of earth tremors occupied a lot of attention in the regulatory debate about shale gas extraction; the United Kingdom is an apt example for this. When companies began to push for shale gas extraction in the UK, the House of Commons initially conducted an investigation and provided the government with a report, which was broadly supportive of shale gas extraction in Britain [125]. While this report was still being printed [126], seismic activities occurred at the first exploratory drilling site in the UK [127]. These earth tremors in the area of Blackpool made it obvious that the initial assessment of shale gas extraction threats was insufficient. At that time, the House of Commons report stated that ‘induced seismicity’ [128] was not thought to be a significant risk in the UK [129].

Following that incident, the English government put a moratorium on shale gas extraction in place, during which a thorough investigation of the causes for this earth tremor took place [130]. By 2012, the commissioned scientific surveys into the Blackpool tremor concluded that the surveyed ‘induced seismicity’ was, to a certain extent, due to pre-existing geological stresses in the area surrounding the site, which were located deep beneath the actual area where shale gas extraction took place; these stresses were unlocked by the application of the hydraulic fracturing technology [131]. However, due to the fact that faults in these deeper layers and not hydraulic fracturing as such were to blame, the reports concluded that shale gas extraction could resume, if additional precautionary measures to avoid ‘induced seismicity’ from layers beneath the targeted shale formations would be implemented [131].

This assessment and the conclusions are contradictory to other studies that have been released in the US and deal with the connection of shale gas extraction to earth tremors [132]. In particular one study on earthquakes in Oklahoma seems to have found a direct link between hydraulic fracturing and induced seismicity [133]. As a result, some scientists claim that a direct link exists, whereas others deny that link and, as with the other potential threats discussed above, the scientific community has not yet arrived at a conclusion.

Turning now to Walker’s methodology on scientific uncertainty. When assessing the first of Walker’s five criteria, conceptual uncertainty with regards to shale gas extraction, it is striking to find that the suspected issues with groundwater contamination have been intensely studied; however, other aspects, like health issues potentially associated with mining of sands that is required as a proppant during the fracturing process have been neglected [134]. In addition, conflict of interests appears to be an issue in shale gas research: a particular incident occurred at the University of Texas at Austin where public debate about a study on shale gas arose, as the independence of one of the researchers involved has been thrown into doubt [135]. Hence, the parameters for conceptual uncertainty can be found in shale gas research.

The second aspect of Walker’s methodology is measurement uncertainty. There might be issues with the reliability of measurements as well as with their validity [74]. In shale gas cases one measurement has never been taken repeatedly on the same object (e.g. groundwater contamination is always measured by samples from wells that are only analysed once). Another issue is that in many cases few actual measurements but many estimations are available (exemplified by the discussion surrounding greenhouse gas emissions of shale gas extraction, in which the emissions are mostly based on estimations not on measurements, with the consequence that studies in that field yield a huge variety of results). Hence, reliability of the measurements can be identified as an issue in shale gas cases.

Validity means that the result of measurements is only valid if they measure exactly what was intended to be measured and not something else [136]. The measurement shall not place the event in the wrong category of the variable (different methods but same subject of measurement) [137]. Decision makers should not merely assume the validity of measurements, even if the results have an aura of mathematical precision; validity is a question of the proper interpretation of the generated data, external to the measurement method itself [138].

In shale gas cases, validity issues can be observed again in the question of groundwater contamination. One study [139] purports to have found a link between hydraulic fracturing and groundwater contamination. However, the study relied on measuring samples from contaminated wells and comparing those samples with others, which were drawn from non-contaminated wells [139]. This methodology can reveal that contamination occurred, but not from which source. The measurement was hence invalid, when it claimed to prove a link between hydraulic fracturing and groundwater contamination. The method measured not what it was supposed to measure (link between fracking and contamination) but instead provided proof for something else (that groundwater contamination had occurred). Thus, measurement uncertainties, unreliability and invalidity of data have occurred in shale gas cases.

The third aspect of uncertainty, according to Walker, is sampling uncertainty. Scientists cannot measure all of the instances they ideally would like to measure [140]. The appropriate technique for reducing sampling uncertainty is an increase in the number of samples drawn [141]. For shale gas currently more research is required before generalizations may be drawn from single samples.

One study, concerned with a US incident, seemed to have established a link between hydraulic fracturing and groundwater contamination. In this particular incident, the well-casing was flawed due to incorrect cementation and it eventually broke during the fracturing process [142]. Fracturing fluid subsequently leaked into groundwater aquifers [142]. To infer a generalization (hydraulic fracturing generally leads to groundwater contamination) from this ‘sample’ (studied incident of broken casing that led to leakage) would require assuming that every fracturing-procedure is performed along flawed well-casing that will eventually break and allow leakage to occur. This generalization is not validated by the findings, because it is not a standard procedure to use flawed well-casing. Thus, the drawn generalization is improper and leads to sampling uncertainty.

The same is true for the potential issue of earth tremors: studies investigated incidents in different parts of the world and yielded different results concerning the question whether shale gas extraction as such triggered the earth tremors in question or whether any other drilling activity would have triggered these tremors as well. If one would want to draw a general conclusion (shale gas extraction triggers earth tremors) a higher number of wells must be investigated to reduce sampling uncertainty, considering the currently inconsistent results.

The fourth aspect is modelling uncertainty. Modelling uncertainty occurs when the evidence of risk involves mathematical models [143]. Generalizations about threats rest upon causal relationships among multiple variables; scientists use mathematical models to predict values for some variables based on values for other variables and these models can introduce uncertainty [144]. Modelling uncertainty arises wherever a claim is made that variable y has a particular mathematical relationship to variable x. Walker uses the mathematical relationship between exposure to electromagnetic fields and leukemia [145] to illustrate that point. If one claims that for every unit of magnetic field exposure the likelihood of falling ill form leukemia increases, for instance, two times, one might be wrong because in reality the risk might increase exponentially [146]. Furthermore, the number ‘two times’ might be incorrect as such [146]. All of these uncertainties are called modelling uncertainties which are being created when two or more variables are related to each other mathematically [146]. As a result, such models cannot advise decision-makers on duration of exposure and permissible field strength [145]. In the case of shale gas such mathematical models have not yet been developed. However, modelling uncertainty due to the, very hard to predict, subsidence of the surface area and the precise geology of the subsurface have to be considered as general issues of conventional as well as unconventional hydrocarbon extraction [147].

Finally, causal uncertainties have to be taken into account. Causal uncertainty means a statistical correlation between two variables, which does not entail causation between these variables. In the case of shale gas, scientific studies in the US have shown that methane contamination of wells did in fact not stem from shale gas extraction, as had been suspected earlier, but some of those contaminations were the result of naturally seepage of methane into those wells [148]. This shale gas example invokes a common source for causal error, a statistically significant correlation between variables A (methane increase in groundwater) and B (commencement of shale gas drilling) has been observed and one concludes incorrectly that A causes B.

To sum up, the existence of none of the five issues in relation to shale gas extraction has been proven beyond reasonable doubt. No clear proof of a threat has surfaced so far, but the existence of some threats can equally not be excluded entirely. That is all the more true, when considering the specific circumstances of limited shale gas extraction in Europe. Thus, the apt way to deal with the potential environmental threats of the technology would be the application of the precautionary principle, as threats are scientifically uncertain.

However, the scientific debate is still ongoing and the ‘devil is in the detail’, a fact highlighted by one of the most awaited and long-standing comprehensive studies on groundwater contamination and shale gas extraction, which is being conducted by the US Environmental Protection Agency [149]. Although the EPA promised to conclude this study in 2014, publication of its results have recently been rolled back two years until 2016 [150].

4.2. Pleadings for prevention
The earlier discussed confusion of the precautionary and preventive principles in the Commission Staff Working Document, once more, underlines the struggle for how to adequately address shale gas extraction and the question mark of how much uncertainty there needs to be in order to take recourse to the precautionary principle. Or, is the precautionary principle automatically attended to, given the scientific uncertainty [151]? In order to invoke the precautionary principle at the European level, a risk assessment of shale gas extraction is needed [152]. In the case of shale gas, an impact assessment, but not a risk assessment has been carried out. This might be a reason why the Commission refrained from making recourse to the principles: if one wants to invoke the precautionary principle one needs to demonstrate uncertainty.

Within shale gas, compared to other technologies such as nanotechnology [153] the uncertainties seem to be rather limited. For example, there is no doubt that the injection of chemicals into the ground can have environmental impacts, just as that fluids in underground wells can migrate and deep and horizontal drilling can have impacts on the stability and the seismicity of rock formations [154]. It has further been argued that shale gas wells have been drilled in the US for up to 10 years now, so that a point of reference exists, even if the American situation cannot be copied to the European situation [154]. It, thus, seems that shale gas in the European Union is not so much about the uncertainties involved but rather about the likelihood that associated threats will emerge in practice [154]. Cherry summarises with regard to cement deterioration of hydraulically fractured wells: “all wells can eventually leak. But under what circumstances will the leakage cause substantial harm?” [155].

As Van Calster already concluded with regards to nanotechnology “[p]rime facie it is possible to assume based on the existence, structure and function of the regulatory regime that all cosmetics products incorporating engineered nanoparticles available in the European market are safe and do not pose a risk to the health of the consumer when used for the purpose for which they were manufactured. But is it really that simple?” [153]. The same reasoning and question can also be asked for shale gas extraction. Drilling activities and even fracturing have taken place before, without being related to shale gas. Hence, we have an idea on the possible implications and, arguably, have a solid legal framework in place. However, as revealed by several studies, there are certain gaps in the regulatory framework on the European level [156].

In addition, there is very limited experience with the use of the activity in the Union, particularly regarding environmental impacts. As already established above, the US experience oftentimes serves as the only point of reference [154]. One could argue that the case of shale gas has already moved up the precautionary ladder. At the “birth” of shale gas extraction, about 10 years ago, it would have been the time to discuss the scientific uncertainties involved. But due to (or thanks to) the United States trial and error approach, European institutions can fast forward the discussion and directly move to the prevention stage.

There has been a public open stakeholder consultation [157] and the creation of a ‘European Science and Technology Network on Unconventional Hydrocarbon Extraction’ [158]. There are also the reporting obligations (or better invitations) on the application of the Commission Recommendation [159] and the creation of a separate BREF Reference Document for shale gas, or rather the revision of the existing one for extractive waste [160]. In that, the Commission indicates a move up the ladder from simply applying a precautionary approach to legislation to a preventive approach.

5. Conclusion
Applying the precautionary and/or preventive principle to shale gas extraction in the European Union and its Member States is not straightforward. The discussions above highlighted that both principles may be distinguished at a conceptual level. However, their practical implications are not very far apart. An increasing gap is discernible between the formal legal situation under the TFEU (which clearly distinguishes between precaution and prevention) and the practical application of the two principles by courts and in legal scholarship (which do not always distinguish between them). As this article highlighted, shale gas is a case in point for this muddied phenomenon.

In the legal literature scientific uncertainty has been discussed as a possibly apt criterion for the distinction between precaution and prevention. However, a definition of scientific uncertainty has often been omitted. In response to that vacuum, we argued that determination of scientific uncertainty may be reached by five different criteria, which have earlier been put forward by Vern R. Walker. With the help of these criteria one can see why the precautionary principle might be applicable to shale gas extraction. None of the five most salient threats of shale gas extraction, groundwater contamination, increased competition for land, the disposal of flow back and greenhouse gas emissions evades the suspicion that a causal link might be difficult to establish.

In terms of prevention, however, American experience with shale gas extraction shows that threats might actually exist. Causation emerges more on the level of an individual project than on the possible impacts of use of the technology generally. The application of the preventive principle would, arguably, focus on what a solid regulatory framework should look like and pave the way towards proportionality discussions associated with the preventive principle.

However, without gaining practical (exploratory) experience with shale gas development in the Member States it will be impossible to assess the potential threats, as well as the overall regulatory framework in practice. Whichever principle is being picked to guide political action on shale gas extraction, it is not subject to debate that ex-ante regulation is needed in the European Union.
