Innovation in energy technology is framed as having the potential to advance renewable energy technologies (RET) towards an environmentally and technologically sustainable energy system. Innovation, however, involves more than RET. New energy technologies include fossil fuels which contribute to a country’s ‘innovativeness.’ The ability of states to foster innovation rests on their regulatory capacity, social acceptability and underlying ecological perspective. In this article a theory of state innovation builds upon National Innovation Capacity (NIC), bringing together state regulatory capacity and the eco-sophistication of society to determine acceptable energy technologies. To frame this investigation, a case study is developed about Poland’s attempt to foster a shale gas industry. Poland is chosen as a case study due to its low ranking for innovation, weak RET deployment plans, and use of coal as a primary energy source; it is a ‘low achiever’ on a comparative basis of states with limited innovation capacity. Poland provides two lessons in relation to state innovation: a) Institutional and regulatory action is underpinned by ecological choices made by society influencing institutional and technology preferences; and b) technology cannot simply be bought and imported, but instead needs to be integrated into an existing NIC and a conducive regulatory system.
Innovation and progress in energy technology is often framed as having the potential to advance renewable energy technologies (RET) towards an environmentally and technologically sustainable energy system [1], [2], [3], [4]. However, technological innovation in the energy sector is not strictly limited to renewables, and the advancement of fossil fuel technologies can also contribute to a country’s ‘innovativeness.’ As the process of innovation comes before technology deployment, consideration should be given to all types of energy technologies and their potential for improving a country’s national innovation capacity (NIC) [5], [6], [7], rather than framing fossil fuels as purely part of the entrenchment of technology. The findings of the research described in this paper explicitly contradict the assumption that RET development can be associated with the presence of a more innovative state [4], or that green technologies are the only challengers to traditional fossil fuels [2]. But, just as technology ‘stretches’ or ‘fits and conforms’ to national settings [2], state institutions and society are pliable with regard to the implementation of new energy technologies.

The contribution of this research is to expose the regulatory adjustments a state makes to match both its NIC and its objective of fostering the uptake of new energy technologies. Building on theories of state innovation, the results highlight the necessity for institutional cooperation and the translation of social and environmental perspectives into incentives to foster new energy technologies [6], [3], [4]. National innovation capacity (NIC) is extended beyond an expression of patent ratios [5], [7] to encompass the broader quantitative and qualitative assessments that drive NIC in relation to environmental and socio-political choices. Such an exercise assists in understanding why countries choose fossil fuel energy technologies justifying the decision that the “immediate benefits of low-carbon energy services may not be apparent to consumers, and the cost may be higher than for conventional energy” (Lamy and Lowe in [8] p. 5). Many countries choose fossil fuels to power their future [9] p. 5, and it is important to establish both the underlying motivation for this, and the nature of the internal state reorganization processes associated with the decision.

Poland provides a relevant case study for the exploration of this situation due to its low innovation ranking [10] and RET deployment plans [11], in addition to the country’s strategy of maintaining coal as the primary energy source. Poland attempted to jump-start shale gas development by deploying the type of incentives and state restructuring processes normally used to encourage RET. Despite these efforts, no new hydraulically fractured wells have been completed since 2014. In 2012, there were 115 active exploration concessions and 84 others had been returned to the state, shrinking the total area under exploration from 30% of Poland’s territory to 7.8% [12]. Meanwhile, at the time of writing in 2016, Polish energy and innovation policy appears to have shifted away from the use of shale gas to the pursuit of coal technologies, such as gasification and liquefaction [13]. Regardless of the lack of success, much can be learned from the Polish experience with reforming the state to foster innovation for a new technology. Poland is classified as low in innovation capacity and environmental awareness, requiring imports of energy technologies, rather than deploying domestically fostered technologies [4]. Findings indicate that significant institutional and societal transformation still needs to occur in order for imported energy technology to be integrated into the domestic system.

This article examines the interaction between innovation and the state in the following manner: The following section justifies the use of Poland as a case study and frames the necessity of exploring NICs. The third section develops and applies the theoretical concepts to state innovation and social influences on energy technologies, and also defines the importance of institutional and social pliability. The fourth section contains a case study about Poland’s attempt to develop its shale gas industry, while the fifth section specifies how energy technologies are deployed based on the NIC and environmental awareness of a country. The article concludes that using fossil fuel technology does not imply the existence of a perilous environment for innovation, but that energy technology – regardless of the natural resources being consumed – requires making changes in institutional practices that correspond to the technology requirements and social ecological values.

2. Background: the state of fracking in Poland
The attempt to locate the story of Polish shale gas within the theoretical considerations of innovation fits with the numerous calls to create better understanding of state innovation processes. This article sheds light on internal state efforts, thereby addressing the “shortage of systemic empirical analysis of governance arrangements and how they affect the innovation process” [14] p. 404, including the necessity of exploring niche development by analyzing the activities of advocates and the strategies used to deploy “path-breaking innovations” [2] p. 1034. Drawing these efforts together creates a study of societies’ involvement in energy systems, including the “rise of hydraulic fracturing technologies for oil and gas extraction” and technology’s relationship to society [15] p. 30. As is evident from the US context, hydraulic fracturing technology is a disruptive innovation that reflects decades of changes in policy development, private effort, and property rights [16]. Exporting this technology may require that the receiving state has significant innovation capacity. Two related outcomes for Poland are supported by the technology diffusion literature: 1) Technology diffusion will enable Poland’s NIC to build a domestic industry without the initially high costs incurred by US, thereby shifting Poland from being an importer of technology to an exporter, similar to Portugal’s experience with wind power [17]; or 2) the import of technologies and regulation will increase the probability of policy transfer failure [18], regardless of the level of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) [19] aimed at policy and technology transfer. The successful integration of foreign technology is based on the regulation and action of state institutions and reflects the political, social and environmental justification for integration. By focusing on examining the actions and processes of the Polish state, a richer picture emerges to inform theories about state innovation.

Only Poland and the United Kingdom (excluding Scotland) among European Member States encourage shale gas extraction, restricting the number of sites which may be examined to understand how state innovation works in relation to the import of hydraulic fracturing technology into Europe. Shale gas deposits are found across Europe, with the largest potential reserves in France and Poland. France maintains a ban on exploration, as does Austria, while Poland displayed the most promising signs of creating a profitable environment for shale gas in 2013 [20] p. 101, 108. Countries with a strong legal basis for supporting hydraulic fracturing include France, Germany, Sweden [21] and the UK. In 2016, Germany banned the extraction of shale gas [22]. In Europe, this leaves only the governments of Poland and the UK, minus Scotland, as consistent supporters of shale gas–despite changes in political leadership. The UK already excels at innovation and has strong environmental awareness, making it a favorable setting for RETs; it also already possesses an effective NIC. In contrast, Poland has ‘low achiever’ status with limited innovation capacity and long timeframes for deployment of new energy technologies [23], [24], [4]. Poland is fighting against historical trends by importing hydraulic fracturing techniques and building up its own NIC, along with attempting to build a nurturing regulatory and investment environment. The focus of this article is on the state innovation processes of low-achieving countries, therefore Poland provides the backdrop.

The analysis of this quest for shale gas in Poland draws on existing literature, the present author’s publication contributions [25];[26] forthcoming, original research involving 27 interviews in Poland, material from energy-related conferences in Poland, and secondary sources. This previous work and the experience derived from it inform the analysis which is designed to contextualize the events and processes in the field of energy technology innovation for the reasons outlined above. In terms of methods, the article does not attempt to explicitly justify the interviewee selection process or the process of collecting secondary data or its analysis, but interview data is employed. Other related publications [25];[26] forthcoming address similar empirical and methodological issues; the focus here is innovation capacity in Poland. Complimentary literature provides greater perspective about Polish environmental opposition [27], geological and legal technicalities [28], [11], [29], [30], [31], [32], hydraulic fracturing as an innovative technology [16], [33], [34], and the existence of multiple policy narratives in Eastern Europe [35]. Accordingly, this article makes no attempt to comprehensively explain the Polish shale gas story.

The American innovation of hydraulic fracturing and attempts to export this technology provide lessons about technology diffusion [17], [19] and state reform. The significant production of domestic US oil and gas from hydraulic fracturing technology has impacted the domestic market and, through exports to Europe, sent geopolitical signals [36]. In 2015, Fifty-two percent of US crude oil production came from tight oil resources (shale-like formations) [37] which use hydraulic fracturing to extract oil and gas. Outside of North America, the technology itself does not contribute to any measurable degree to economic development, but it is prompting an examination of governance processes [38], [25], [39]. Rather than directly engaging with the governance literature regarding shale gas, this article contributes to the literature on state innovation processes within the energy sector [5], [24], [2], [3], [4], by specifically challenging the assumption that state innovation support can only be applied to renewable energy technologies. Rather than assuming “more renewable energy technology/product specific support may be very important to enhance industry growth” [40] p. 54, this paper proposes that promoting fossil fuel technology is one way that governments can contribute to NIC and industrial competiveness.

3. State innovation theory
Fostering innovation in energy technology rests on state regulatory capacity and the social acceptability of particular technologies. The regulatory capacity of the state contains the marketplace of technologies, in which specific energy technologies may be encouraged or discouraged. Cognitive problem framing and normative solutions become established as a result of societal perceptions about ecological problems, and the choice of energy technologies thereby influences institutional cooperation within a state. Walsh [4] provides a framework for eco-sophistication (explained below) into which countries are classified according to which innovative technologies are encouraged or discouraged on the basis of whether policies and financial opportunities match societal perceptions about ecology and domestic knowledge networks.

Fig. 1 illustrates the interaction between state and society; the organization of a state’s sphere of influence in terms of regulations and market aligned with the societal influence of cognition and normative values, including social strategies. As discussed next, energy technologies are fostered through a complex process of institutional (state) and socio-techno interaction. Scaling up technologies requires institutional stretching and transforming to incentivize investments by “shaping norms, standards and routines” [2] p. 1031. The integration of new technology requires pliability in terms of this complex process of technology reform. The following sections of this paper are organized by their treatment of: 1) state regulatory capacity; 2) eco-sophistication; and, 3) institutional and social pliability, thereby facilitating the examination of the dynamic interaction between state and society around energy technologies within the state apparatus.
3.1. State regulatory capacity
State authority is exercised through regulatory mechanisms that permit or prevent technologies from entering the marketplace. State institutions are not exclusively cooperative elements that work to foster policy transfer within a multinational governance system, advancing a society and country towards a common good (e.g. the goal of the European Union). The core of state influence is its power of regulation, used for “coercion and hierarchical control” with absolute limits[14] p. 409. Governance historically emerges through a state-centric process (that is, from state-centered institutions regulating domestically) into a landscape of international cooperation, enabling companies and other experts to contribute to their own regulation through joint agencies [41], and that there has been “a decline in hierarchical forms of intervention, and a rise of other forms of governance, such as regulated self-regulation, private self-regulation...” [42] p. 42. The perspective of state authority that is put forward here corresponds to the idea that a hierarchical state structure expresses its power through regulation.
“The state – the machinery and power of the state – is a potential resource or threat to every industry in the society. With its power to prohibit or compel, to take or give money, the state can and does selectively help or hurt a vast number of industries” [43] p. 3.


State regulation permits only specified commercial activities, and the state itself maintains the authority to give or withdraw ‘permission’ for the maintaining, excluding or encouragement of specific technologies in the national energy mix. Different types of states may grant different industries advantages or disadvantages. Essential to the state is its (a) innovation capacity[5] as applied to fostering innovative technologies, which rests on practiced institutional renewal and new technological knowledge. Differences in the NICs of countries reflect “variations in both economic geography... as well as cross-country differences in innovation policy (e.g. the level of public support for basic research or legal protection for intellectual property)” [5] p. 900. State policies directed at fostering innovation rely on a toolbox of financial and institutional encouragements depending on the type of technology and the financial-institutional environment within a country. In addition, state market policies are important because they prohibit or compel companies to offer products or services. From a regulatory perspective these are expressed as incentives or penalties for market participants [14] p. 409.

Reflecting the variety of economic policies across countries, deployment depends on the broader range of actors and institutional policies that give the state leeway to influence (b) markets. Policies and incentives may be directed at improving “domestic industries on world markets and simultaneously solv[ing] domestic energy needs” by linking energy policies to support for R&D, innovative policies and the creation of markets [40] p. 54. Innovation policies translate into specific energy support schemes depending on the types of technology and industries being supported [44]. Countries may be roughly classified based on their financial policies. For innovation-push countries, the broader array of financial mechanisms appears in the form of grants, incubators and venture capital funding. In innovation-pull countries, where traditional energy technologies such as fossil fuels dominate, benefits may accrue to established firms rather than new entrepreneurial RET firms [45] pp. 5001–5002. Through these tools, the state attempts to select which companies and technologies succeed in the domestic, and in turn, the global, marketplace.

3.2. Eco-sophistication
State institutions define the policies and regulations that influence the market and methods of entry for new technologies, but it is policy makers, societies and managers that make cognitive choices based on problem framing and normative values[14] p. 409. As renewable energy markets tend to require supportive public policies rather than direct competition for their commercialization, the policy process calls for active market intervention. Part of this involves making a pro-RET decision and obtaining societal permission through reference to environmental concerns. Eco-sophistication emerges as a means of assessing and categorizing countries in relation to new energy technologies along a spectrum of environmental awareness and commercialization strategies [4].

Developing the concept of eco-sophistication (Table 1) means reflecting on societies’ choices “between higher-cost, yet more ecologically friendly, renewable energy products and lower-cost, ecologically unfriendly, non-renewable energy products” [4] p. 34. For example, in an innovation-pull environment, such as exists in Cluster 3 countries, the economic incentives on the market are directed at established utilities, while the regulatory environment maintains hierarchical control and entry can only be gained through cooperation with preexisting (and state-approved) market actors. Other types of countries favor different commercialization strategies based on their level of eco-sophistication.
The concept ‘eco-sophistication’ is a useful device for distinguishing between a pro-green technology stance and a preference for retaining older technologies, thus corresponding to the specific push-pull policy choices a country favors. Countries which do not deploy significant RET may rely on fossil fuels and established policy measures that favor incumbent technologies, or at least be negligent about new technologies. Walsh’s model highlights high-achieving RET countries which reach ‘Innovation Nirvana’ “when levels of eco-sophistication and demand for renewable energy are relatively high”, with many entrepreneurs and a lack of obstacles from incumbents [4] p. 36. Conversely, the term ‘Innovation Wasteland’ applies to countries which are struggling to deploy RET, have “little to no incentives for innovation in RET products”, and lack demand [4] p. 35. Nonetheless, it is important to emphasize that not all states possess the administrative knowledge or the capacity to boost RET, and the social recognition of environmental benefits may also be low. Therefore, Innovation Wasteland is also a nuanced term, as are the elements which construct success in Innovation Nirvana. As outlined above, a host of issues interact to create the benefits of low-carbon technologies, although these may remain invisible to consumers, particularly those that are cost-conscious (Lamy and Lowe in[8] p. 5).

Adjustments of official strategies and societal goals stem from the normative “development of values and beliefs....signal[ing] to actors what society ‘wants’”[14] p. 409. New technologies erode the profits of existing methods and investments: as upgrading costs money, oligopolistic industries may resist change [46] p. 677. (c) “Normative pressures influence an organization’s strategic decisions by the need to comply with norms that are generally considered to be right” [47] p. 1245. Institutional and societal pressures play a role in how companies respond to formative social values. State institutions adjust their tools in order to encourage or discourage particular technologies, partially because of these normative pressures. The NIC of a country is designed and shaped by knowledge networks that respond to the regulatory standards established by the state [5]. For change to occur, (d) cognitive recognition of the sets of rules of engineering practices must be modified, along with the knowledge networks which are institutionally embedded [1] p. 903. Consensual knowledge develops on the basis of problem and solution framing, while knowledge networks are necessary for the establishment and development of solutions based on a common language or procedures. These networks can be viewed as partnerships (e.g. private-public) which are re-enforced by government R&D support [14] p. 409. In turn, state institutions associated with the approval of new technologies (such as energy regulators or ministries) send market signals – reflecting social acceptability – to private firms which encourage or discourage them from investing in particular technologies. New technologies emerge from “a sectoral system of innovation and production,” with supporters attempting to advance new rules, regulations and knowledge networks [48] p. 248 based on the proposed solutions.

This emphasis on the role of society in national technological choices is aligned with the regulatory capacity of the state. Energy technologies receive state support and are deployed depending on the country’s level of eco-sophistication. The development of (a) innovation capacity translates into “the ability of a country – as both a political and economic entity – to produce and commercialize a flow of new-to-the-world technologies over the long term” [5] p. 900. The expression of these choices reaches the (b) market through push-pull policies, and the support (or neglect) they give to subsidies, tax incentives or stable investments that support problem-solving through institutional capacity. The dominant socio-environmental choices are reflected in state structures and (c) norms through embedded engineering practices, rules, procedures and the domination of knowledge networks within the state [1] p. 903. (d) Cognitive responses emerge from the identification of problems and solutions which favor or disfavor challenger technologies, thereby affecting whether they are brought to market. As discussed in the following section, institutional and social flexibility and reforms play an important role in integrating new technologies.

3.3. Institutional and social pliability
How a country changes its energy system depends on a range of variables across the socio-political spectrum, while still rooted in the regulatory authority of the state. Changes that are necessary for fostering a particular technology depend on institutional and social ‘pliability’. Institutions themselves either accommodate and stretch, or may fit and conform, to the requirements of technology [2]. Society, likewise, either reframes or rejects problems and solutions, thereby enabling or disabling technologies. The flexibility and rigidity of state institutions and the eco-sophistication of society stems from the historical interplay of society and state institutions’ involvement with energy technologies from a normative and cognitive perspective (Innovation Nirvana/Wasteland). Clusters of countries (Table 1) have similar levels of institutional and social pliability that are represented in the national innovation capacity of state and society [5], [4], both of which may promote new technologies. The regulatory preferences for chosen technologies are derived from state-centric policy and financial measures (push-policies) or state-approved measures that signal the ‘better’ choices to society and firms (pull-policies) and act to encourage domestic production or technology imports, depending on the specific NIC of a country.

State regulatory capacity is reflected in institutional and social pliability, stemming from eco-sophistication, commercialization strategies and the market structures of a country. State authority is exercised through institutions that shape markets and grant or withdraw permission for particular technologies in the marketplace. The eco-sophistication of a country reflects underlying values and the cognition of problems and their solutions. Through their NIC, state institutions pursue technologies that will fulfill political, social and economic goals, based on the normative social values and potential solutions created by the level of eco-sophistication of a country. This theoretical proposal of how NICs operate is now applied to the attempted deployment of hydraulic fracturing technology in Poland. The following section provides an empirical example of this country, located near to the zone of the Innovation Wasteland, which sought to import innovative foreign technology to ‘upgrade’ its existing technology stock. While the focus is on how RET was rejected in favor of fossil fuel technologies, the example shows how normative social values are created and amplified by state institutions to influence markets and incentivize particular technologies. The NIC of Poland pursues foreign investment, but the state institutions themselves are the actors which are remaking regulations against global market forces and decreasing the interest in investing in Poland.

4. The results of Polish innovation policy
Poland provides a valuable case study of a country wedded to a path of low innovation and fossil fuels in comparison to other EU countries. In this section, Poland’s innovation ranking is first reviewed, together with its efforts to continue building an energy sector based on fossil fuels. Second, the justification for pursuing shale gas is appraised according to the country’s energy strategy and the perceived economic impact of domestic shale gas production. Third, how alterations to legislation, along with cooperation between countries, demonstrate that even a ‘low’ innovation country can internally reorganize and build an innovation environment capable of fostering investment in a specific energy technology, regardless of its environmental profile, is described. Finally, the paper clarifies how the attempt to foster hydraulic fracturing technology in Poland has resulted in the restructuring of institutions and incentives.

4.1. Innovation and a fossil fuel energy strategy
According to the EU’s Innovation Union Scoreboard, Poland is a ‘moderate innovator,’ languishing fifth from the bottom of a ranking of EU countries, and performing below the “EU average for all dimensions particularly for open, excellent and attractive research systems and linkages and entrepreneurship” [10] p. 65. Poland also scores low for eco-innovation using a composite of 16 indicators that includes firms’ success in reducing material inputs, government expenditure on environmental and energy R&D, and efficiency in water and energy use [49]. Conversely, low eco-innovation scores also produce, “a considerable economic opportunity in modernizing the production processes, notably in the most energy and resource intensive sectors” [50] p. 6. Identified problems with eco-innovation also correspond to “difficult access to capital, uncertain return on investment and the weak system of economic and fiscal incentives encouraging eco-innovation” [50] p. 5. Eco-innovation in Poland, therefore, suffers from a lack of financial support mechanisms and cooperation between institutions and companies, including research, while the situation also creates opportunities for investing into the energy sector.

Poland’s energy strategy maintains coal and gas as central elements. While roughly 14% of its electricity is produced from wind and other renewables [51], changing government policy is seeking to constrain this growth, except for off-shore wind farms [13] whose input may increase to a projected maximum of 15%, matching Poland’s EU 2020 pledge. Justification for limiting renewables stems from current grid capacity and the variable power output of renewables which is reducing the efficiency of coal power plants; input from renewables should be limited to 10% of the electricity mix [13].

Poland foresees adding 7.8 GW of electricity generation by 2020, with 4.6 GW of this from new coal fired power plants and 3 GW from gas – with a capacity over 100 MW [52] – thus leaving little room for additional RET. The Polish government assesses the cost of deploying large scale renewable energy technologies as being significantly higher than estimates by the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). IRENA claims that the cost of increasing renewables within the power sector by 2030 will amount to 6.3 USD per Gigajoule (USD/GJ), while the Polish government estimates the cost at 10.3 USD/GJ. The IRENA plan includes slashing CO2 emissions by 22% from 1990s levels, while the current Polish plan involves increases in CO2[53] p. 18 and 21. What is evident from these estimates is the significant difference of opinion about the cost of transitioning to an environmentally sustainable energy system.

Construction of new coal power plants is proceeding lethargically in Poland. Recently, the country gained additional time for decommissioning or modernizing its aging coal-fired power plants as the European Commission accepted an extension to the Industrial Emissions Directive from 2016 to 2020. This means that 4.5 GW of energy will continue to come from (older) coal plants [52] as 40% of coal-fired power plants in Poland are over 40 years of age. Overall, Poland will continue to generate over 80% of its power from coal; by 2050 coal may still comprise 60% of total generation, with 20% from gas [54]. In 2016, merely four percent of electricity generation came from gas. Russia supplies two-thirds of gas imports, while one-third of the gas the country consumes is domestically produced [55]. Shale gas offers a way to transition towards the use of cleaner-burning fossil fuels and provide a level of energy security similar to that of a predominantly coal-based energy mix.

Poland maintains a consistent energy strategy that is integrated with a political vision and economic strategy of retaining fossil fuels while constraining the use of RET; this approach spans political parties and governments. In 2013, the former Prime Minister Donald Tusk (2007–2014) stated that coal and “soon shale gas” will remain dominant, with renewable energy sources remaining “limited as much as EU rules will allow” [56]. In addition, to promote energy security, “the exploration and production of shale gas seems to be absolutely crucial” [57]. In 2015, Polish elections ushered in a new government, but the continuity of the former energy strategy remained unbroken. Political support for fossil fuels has not faded, while the sidelining of RET was viewed as beneficial to the Polish consumer. Poland’s Energy Minister, Krzysztof Tchorzewski, asserted that the EU’s pursuit of zero carbon emissions in the power sector by 2050 would be impossible to apply to Poland, stating: “we (Poland) reject that [this,it is] clearly unacceptable”. The sacrifice involved in moving away from coal would be too great for Poland. Instead, the country will pursue an energy strategy that utilizes high-efficiency, coal-fired power plants that require less coal per unit of power output [13]. Policy continuity in limiting RET and promoting fossil fuels remains undiminished.

Social support for shale gas is important in this political strategy. At the height of the shale gas project, Poles expressed their opinion about the types of fossil fuels that should be prioritized over the next 30 years; in a Eurobarometer survey, ten percent of respondents said that conventional fossil fuels should be prioritized, while 82% stated that they were in favour of “unconventional fossil fuels, such as shale gas” [58] p. 49. Opposition to shale gas, while alive in a few locations [59], [60], [27], has also been tempered by environmental organizations, “We should not expect too much in the way of shale gas development in Poland, as a threat or a success story. Simply put, conditions are totally different in Poland than in the US, with which the government often compares us” (personal communication, [61]). This foresight on the part of environmentalists indicates a more tempered approach to what is possible when it comes to changing the country’s energy mix.

Shale gas exploration was most active in 2012 at which time the Polish Geological Institute estimated that there were at least 2.5–5.5 times more shale gas deposits than those of conventional gas (346–768 Bcm) in Poland. This is equivalent to 120–200 years of current domestic gas production [31]. This potential stimulated global and domestically owned gas and oil firms to begin exploration activities, with around a dozen exploration wells being drilled each year from 2011 to 2014. In 2012, 115 concessions were awarded, covering 30% of Poland’s territory. Foreign companies active during this time included Marathon Oil, Talisman Energy, Exxon Mobil, San Leon Energy, Cuadrilla Resources Ltd. and BNK Petroleum [62]. By 2015, more than $2 billion had been invested in exploration; despite this, no wells were yet consistently producing shale gas [63].

By 2016, it was apparent that the shale gas revolution had failed: 84 concessions were returned and the area under exploration had shrunk to 7.8% (mainly leaving state-owned firms). The decline was apparent by 2015 when only four exploration wells were drilled and no hydraulic fracturing tests were conducted, in great contrast to the heights of 2012 when eight tests were conducted along with four more in the two years following [12]. External factors provide further impetus for the demise of Polish shale gas: In 2014, the drop in the global price of oil and natural gas altered the investment strategies of most oil and gas firms, and Polish shale gas was not isolated from these global trends, as was already apparent before the drop in price. Firms’ investment strategies had already changed due to the decline in exploration and the exit of foreign firms in 2013 and 2014.

4.2. Encouraging shale gas extraction
Shale gas potentially offered a solution to Polish environmental, security, and economic problems. The three reasons for pursing shale gas stem from three specific problems with the Polish energy system: 1) a lack of energy security, 2) environmental pollution, and 3) weak economic competiveness ([26] in-press). The cost of producing shale gas, while higher than that of conventional fuels, was still viewed by Polish stakeholders as preferential from a cost perspective to Russian gas, or the potentially higher cost of dealing with the emissions associated with the use of coal. There is a “huge [financial] margin between domestic production and imported Russian gas” (personal communication, Advisor to Ministry of Environment, 2012). In addition, shale gas offered a financial hedge against increases in the cost of coal, as “there is financial pressure to punish coal. It may not be economically competitive [in the future]” (personal communication, Private Geologist, 2012). Price increases of European Emission Trading Scheme (ETS) credits could result in higher costs for energy companies, who will pass these along to electricity end-users. “If the price of carbon grows by 20–40 euros per ton, it will affect those companies.” (personal communication, State Treasury Official A, 2012). Domestically produced shale gas offers both economic and security advantages.

The Polish state employed three methods for building a shale gas industry. The first involved the tax regime. “Taxation is very important. It is a signal to industry and investors who are waiting to invest” in Poland (personal communication, Economic Development Representative A, 2012). Reforming the tax regime was always on the government’s agenda, but reforms were delayed. It was not until 2014 – after companies began withdrawing – that a six-year tax holiday was enacted with the potential for tax not to exceed 40% after 2020. This tax incentive coincided with a continuous decline in the exploration for shale gas, indicating that is was not enough of an incentive to spur exploration activity and that other factors were at play in reducing such activities. However, it is important to view this financial tool as part of the overall policy approach and package of reforms deployed by the Polish government to encourage shale gas exploration and extraction.

The second push by the Polish government involved fostering cooperation between firms. The impetus for shale gas development prompted efforts to unify cooperation within and between Polish state-owned firms, but these were not always successful. One construction that five Polish firms initially agreed to set up proposed to spend €415 million on the joint exploration and extraction of shale gas. However, in January 2014 cooperation was cancelled and no further agreement was reached between the companies [64]. The Polish government also sought to incentivize cooperation by providing PLN 500 million for the ‘Blue Gas’ R&D project that required companies to invest an equal amount [65]. Thus, while cooperation may have occurred at specific operational locales, long-term R&D projects did not come into existence.

Cooperation also involved international corporations. The participation of foreign energy service firms (such as Cuadrilla Resources, and Exxon Mobil), was viewed as essential for building up a shale gas industry in Poland, as the necessary expertise and technology was in the hands of these firms. In contrast, Polish firms lacked both expertise with hydraulic fracturing and sufficient financial backing, and were thus limited in terms of scaling up exploration and extraction. As stated by a senior Polish executive, “We don’t have the knowledge in Poland” (personal communication, manager of state-owned oil and gas firm A, 2012). “Without international capital, the Polish shale gas project will never happen” (personal communication, manager private oil and gas firm, 2012). FDI was critical for scaling up the sector and securing the long-term financial backing necessary for continuing technology development. Exports of Polish shale gas technology and expertise were foreseen, including to next door Ukraine which has similar geology (personal communication, manager state-owned oil and gas firm A, 2012; [66];[65]; personal communication, Foreign Ministry Official A, 2012; [26] in-press). If Polish firms could domestically tap shale gas, they could also tap shale gas internationally, so the race was on to foster a domestic shale gas industry.

Corporate partnerships were formed based on the expertise of firms with topics such as project financing, technology and knowledge exchange. As one example, San Leon Energy received money from private and institutional investment funds, including Quantum Partners, to fund exploration activities [67];[68] n.d.. Joint partnerships were initiated by Polish and North American firms such as PGNiG and Chevron. These partnerships offered financial backing and exchanges of technological information, in addition to American financing for exploration, and to provide fracking technology which could be combined with Polish geological and administrative knowledge (for more on the role of international firms, see LaBelle [26] in-press). Cooperation, financing and knowledge exchange were central to the development of Poland’s domestic industry.

The third method of encouraging shale gas extraction was to make alterations to the environmental oversight and permitting regime. Polish environmental regulations are comparable to those which exist in France, Germany or Sweden for unconventional gas exploration [21]. The authority of the EU indirectly regulates the environmental impacts of hydraulic fracturing technology, but does not ban or prevent it [69], [70], [21]. Nonetheless, there was significant criticism of Polish administrative procedures, including by Poland's State Supreme Audit Office, which cited significant internal obstacles to fostering and overseeing shale gas development in Poland [71].

In 2014, Poland amended its Geological and Mining Law to address criticism in two areas. This involved the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process which local environmentalists had raised issues with (personal communication, [61]). A simplified procedure was put in place that took into account the particular demands of hydraulic fracturing and specified necessary on-site adjustments, along with monitoring and approval procedures from state institutions, such as drilling deeper than originally planned without having to return to regulators for approval [72] pp. 73–74. In 2014, a modification of the EIA procedures prompted the European Commission to send a formal notice of infringement of the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive [73]. Poland stood by these changes. In addition, other areas that were addressed included concession holders’ rights to extract and the time allowed to realize a profit [72] pp. 73–74; these changes attempted to encourage management to extract shale gas at a faster rate. Modifications of the law were designed to align the legal environment with technical and investor requirements for exploring and extracting shale gas in a timely manner.

Shale gas had the potential to maintain the focus on fossil fuels due to Poland’s consistent strategy of using fossil fuels for power production. Coal and gas are central elements of this strategy, which is politically and socially supported. Integrating shale gas with existing policy, social and institutional frameworks offered an opportunity to modernize fossil fuel production. However, hydraulic fracturing technology was developed in North America, with open institutional structures that fostered the development of relationships between industry, universities and government institutions. Poland ranks at the bottom of the list of EU countries for such ties in the area of innovation. However, the shale gas story is not one of total failure. Policies and regulations were altered to make them similar to those of more innovative countries. Institutionally, Poland was able to readjust and simplify the regulatory procedures required for shale gas extraction. However, it was not able to control the international gas market, nor shale gas geology. There is a need to assess this Polish experience with shale gas to understand how policies related to boosting regulatory readjustments can be promoted in states with low eco-innovation typologies. Understanding how to foster new energy technologies (regardless of environmental impact) in innovation-poor countries is key to reforming policies and institutions which will enable the greater deployment of advanced technologies.

5. Discussion: state of national innovation
Improving Poland’s NIC is based on a policy of importing hydraulic fracturing technology and fostering domestic industry with FDI, thereby spurring cooperation between domestic institutions and companies. State innovation theory rests on the capacity of state regulation to facilitate a match between technology and eco-sophistication. Success with this will translate into the political blocking of RET and the promotion of fracking, thereby moving Poland closer to the Innovation Nirvana of fossil fuel technologies. Polish institutions have been stretched and transformed by the roll-out of innovation-push policies that encourage investment, while ecological concerns have remained low. High Polish cost projections for RET, in contrast to other estimates [53], are used to justify the greater use of fossil fuels rather than encouraging deployment of RET. While Innovation Nirvana remains elusive in terms of RET, the NIC for hydraulic fracturing technology has become more favorable.

The pliability of institutions demonstrates how regulations and policies may be transformed to meet the demands of new technology. A more flexible regulatory environment was created to attract foreign investors and FDI. Despite early hesitancy about reform, changes to laws and regulations were implemented. Social justification in terms of an increase in security and lower energy prices (compared to RET) were echoed in public perceptions of shale gas. Coercion and control through regulatory action was attempted to promote the technological renewal of fossil fuels, while restricting the promotion of ‘expensive’ RET as an alternative energy source. The level of eco-sophistication in Poland played an instrumental part in allowing shale gas exploration to advance. Despite these attempts, the lack of production wells clearly demonstrates that these efforts have been insufficient to overcome either technical or market barriers to encouraging gas extraction. The two potential outcomes framed at the start of this article (Poland as exporter of technology, and Poland fails to transfer policies and technology) [17], [18], [19] in retrospect, have blended. Results indicate that Poland transformed its policies, but failed to expand (or even maintain) the use of hydraulic fracturing technology. This outcome clearly does not represent either a success with policy transfer or the emergence of an industry based on FDI. Improvement in the NIC is also clearly mixed as Polish and foreign firms are not noticeably making headway with extraction. Neither outright failure nor success can be identified from the change in state institutions, leaving the process of transformation open to further examination.

At a deeper level, Poland’s NIC operated within the fossil fuel sector and was perceived as being ripe for the launch of a domestic shale gas revolution. The state’s regulatory capacity enabled institutional and market-based changes to occur. The authority of the state stemmed from the cognitive identification of problems and the normative interpretation of solutions. Established knowledge networks in firms and between state institutions responded by adjusting regulatory standards to match the technical requirements of the new technologies [5];[2] p. 1031. State institutions were not deaf to these adjustments, but the existing engineering practices [1] required alteration and alignment with the new technical requirements of hydraulic fracturing and investor expectations, demanding the ‘stretching and transforming’ of institutional arrangements [2] to new requirements.

The position of Poland at the low end of eco-sophistication and innovation rankings mean that it borders on being an Innovation Wasteland [10], [4]. Being a Cluster 3 country, Poland requires imports of technology, either through licensing arrangements or outsourcing. In the case of hydraulic fracturing, this situation represents only a third of the story. The ingredients for the development of shale gas in Poland were one-third regulatory, one-third geological, and one-third technical. Possession of resources in only one of these areas was insufficient to make progress, even with the exploration of shale gas.

Poland opened up to foreign investment and new technology, and state institutions and society became pliable to technological change. Because of this, Poland moved nearer Innovation Nirvana by using innovation-push policies to foster fossil fuel technology which borrowed from the toolset used to promote RET. Use of this toolset was not overly successful, but it did demonstrate that the state could reorganize institutions and financial incentives to foster the speed of innovation and investment into the country’s energy strategy. Poland emerged as a Cluster 2 country, with a reliance on outsourcing and licensing compounded with financial investment from foreign firms (such as the Quantum Fund’s investment in San Leon’s Polish project). State firms did not seek to block the entrance of foreign firms but rather acted as bridges through joint partnerships (with companies such as Chevron and PGNiG), seeking to embed new engineering practices and regulatory procedures into Poland. If Germany and Spain, as Cluster 2 countries, are nearing Innovation Nirvana for RET, then Poland is nearing Innovation Nirvana for hydraulic fracturing, albeit with low-level ecological practices. Poland demonstrated institutional pliability by becoming flexible towards regulatory and investment requirements.

There are two lessons to learn from the story of shale gas development in Poland and the case of the complexity of fostering innovation in a new energy technology within a country. First, institutional and regulatory action is underpinned by ecological choices that are made by society and which influence institutional and social pliability and the ability to foster new technologies. Second, technology cannot simply be bought and imported, but instead needs to be integrated into an existing NIC and a conducive regulatory system. Taken together, national innovation can be seen as a circular process that is reliant on the interaction between social and economic processes and which can enable state institutions to make regulatory interventions into markets so as to foster a better technological trajectory.

The attempt to introduce hydraulic fracturing technology to Poland provides us with an opportunity to examine state-supported innovation methods. In this case, the NIC of Poland was exposed to change through the shale gas project. The incubation of new technologies requires that overlaps are created between industries, academia and state financial support, backed up by sustained political support. The outcome (after approximately five years) exposes the domestic and international mechanisms that influence the deployment of an energy technology. Internally, the Polish state adjusted local rules and regulations, but not the institutional capacity and networks necessary to support scientific discoveries that would have adapted technology to Poland’s geology. Externally, the price of gas changed and foreign companies modified their exploration activities. Sustaining innovation requires that continued investment into specific resources and technologies be justified. The potential financial benefit – the final price difference between domestically produced gas and imported gas – was found to be too opaque in the short and long term. This financial spread was insufficient to overcome domestic institutional hurdles and the uncertainty around both short and long-term European gas prices. Accordingly, during this 5-year trial period companies were both paradoxically encouraged (through state signals) and discouraged (by market signals) to explore and extract.

6. Conclusion
Poland’s status as a low achiever in innovation and ecological concerns make it a critical case study for assessing the deployment of hydraulic fracturing technology. On the surface, the embedded institutional processes and social acceptability of fossil fuels make it an ideal country for fracking. However, within state institutions and the country’s innovation capacity there are hurdles to greater cooperation and difficulty adjusting to the demands of a new technology. The slow demise of the Polish shale gas revolution indicates that the alignment of internal and external environments is essential for energy technologies to be successful. As foreign companies changed their approaches for internal and external reasons, the Polish state slowly adjusted. Future research into state innovation can draw on this experience to better understand how energy technologies require that host countries are institutionally able to receive and integrate firms’ business models and associated technologies–even if they are low on innovation capacity.

This article provides some resolution to the issue of the shortage of empirical analyses about governance arrangements in the innovation process [14] p. 404, while also exploring the activities of advocates of “path-breaking innovations” in a transition period [2] p. 1034, including hydraulic fracturing technology and the related social relations with the environment and the perceptions of technologies which are “salient at times of transition” [15] p. 30. The limitations of this article are primarily related to the lack of data about both the external factors that affect firm investment strategies, such as the price of oil and gas, and internal data limitations, such as geological findings from test wells and decision-making procedures within state and private firms. The explicit focus on the government’s efforts to foster an innovative energy technology is an attempt to put government action and social acceptability under the analytical lens, while indirectly assessing firm strategies based on their drilling activities and public and private statements. A follow-up study with some of the firm managers who decided to exit would provide a more nuanced perspective about the justification for not investing or sustaining shale gas exploration.

The focus on state innovation methods extends existing innovation literature to explain innovation in fossil fuel technologies. States choose to maintain fossil fuels as a central part of their energy strategies for purposes that may be at odds with environmental sustainability, but which align with socio-economic and eco-socio perspectives. Extending this conceptual model to account for the innovation which occurs in fossil fuel technologies assists with understanding why technological choices and innovation strategies shape energy systems. Innovation Nirvana may be the place where RET succeeds, yet Innovation Wasteland may not be the place for fossil fuels. State institutional capacity and governance structures prioritize fossil fuel technologies when political and public perceptions of RET envisage the undermining of economic competitiveness and conflict with social and security policies. Further research should clarify the justification for and public framing of fossil fuels as a low-cost fuel when RET continues to decline in cost and can contribute to energy security. Rather than seeing Poland’s shale gas revolution as having failed, lessons should be learned about why institutional capacity fosters innovation and the deployment of fossil fuels instead of RET in order to address environmental, security, and social problems.