This paper uses the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) to select the alternative consistent with the goal of achieving energy security in Poland. The study considers three possible alternatives: the extraction of shale gas from domestic sources (A), diversification of gas supply (B), and maintaining the status quo (C). Data for comparisons were obtained from interviews with energy sector experts after rejecting responses that did not meet consistency criteria. The alternative, which satisfies the largest number of the models' criteria and subcriteria is the alternative supporting shale gas mining (model A), while the second preferred alternative is the diversification of gas supply sources (model B). The least favorable is alternative C, maintaining the status quo. The study is the first to assess the energy security alternatives in Poland by obtaining a synthetic score reflecting multiple qualitative factors.
Energy security is a priority of any government⿿s energy policy. An adequate amount of energy has a stabilizing effect on the economy, guarantees quality of life, and secures the general welfare of society. Energy self-sufficiency is measured by the ratio of energy produced to energy consumed [1]. For example, in 2007 the ratio in Great Britain (expressed in percentage terms) was 95%, while in Germany only 39%. The same indicator for the European Union (EU) as a whole was 49%. The relatively high dependency on imported energy in the EU is expected to increase and amount to 70% of consumed energy in the next 20⿿30 years.

Poland produced 83% of its consumed energy in 2005. Coal amounted to 59% of the primary energy generated and about 93% of electricity was generated from coal, the highest share in the EU. Among other EU countries, Estonia and the Czech Republic generate about one half of their electricity from burning coal. In 2013, the share of various feedstock in electric energy production was 49.6% from coal, 34.1% from lignite, 3.2% from gas, 2.4% from other feedstock including oil, 10.4% from renewable energy sources, and 0.3% from pumped water [2]. Poland does not operate a nuclear power plant as a result of public outcry that led to abandonment of construction in the early 1990s.

In recent decades, energy sources have been diversified and their relative importance has changed in many countries. In 2011, EU energy needs, expressed as the gross national utilization rates, were satisfied by oil, 35%, natural gas, 24%, solid fuels like coal, 17%, nuclear energy, 14%, and renewable energy like wind or hydropower, 10% [3].

EU dependency on imported energy resources represents a threat to internal coherence should a single member-country choose to ignore the interests of the bloc [4]. Currently, the EU is the world⿿s largest energy importer. Imports satisfy 55% of its energy supply, including 84% of oil and 64% of gas needs. Natural gas accounted for 24% of the EU primary energy consumption in 2011 and is expected to reach 30% in 2030 [5]. Within the EU, 15 countries are particularly large natural gas users in efforts to reduce CO2 and greenhouse gas emissions (GGE). Additionally, events outside the EU influence the EU energy balance. The recent conflict with Russia threatened natural gas price increases [6] and several EU countries, which import all their natural gas from that single supplier could compromise their energy security [7]. Those with diversified supply sources and multiple supply routes are able to bargain and lower import prices [8].

Poland is equally vulnerable to threats to its energy security despite the currently high level of energy safety due to substantial domestic coal production and its role in the country⿿s energy balance [9]. However, the European Commission (EC) adopted the climate and energy framework, which implies that all EU countries achieve the so called ⿿3 ÿ 20⿿ goals by 2020. The ⿿3 ÿ 20⿿ formula entails, first, lower CO2 emissions by 20%; second, increase the share of energy from renewable sources to 20%; and, third, increase the energy efficiency by 20% [10].

High oil prices and the desire to diversify energy sources play a role in shale gas exploration. The world has witnessed a great increase in oil companies⿿ interest in searching for unconventional gas deposits, primarily shale gas. The interest has resulted from the development and application of the high-volume hydraulic fracturing process. Technical progress allows testing a large number of sites in a much shorter period of time [11]. To lower the dependency on imported feedstock, an EU study analyzed several scenarios of domestic production of shale gas and a reduction of energy importation. The study concluded that reaching natural gas self-sufficiency is unlikely in the EU, but unconventional local energy sources, under an optimistic scenario, could replace decreasing natural gas production [12]. The dependence on energy feedstock imports would remain roughly unchanged at 60%.

The rapid increase in shale gas extraction that has taken place in the United States may change that country into a net energy exporter [13]. Shale gas exploration has already resulted in divergent energy prices between the United States and the EU; energy prices in Europe were fourfold higher than in the United States in 2012. The MAE industrial price index of electricity prices in the European OECD member-countries increased by 37%, while registering a 4% decrease in the United States during the period 2007⿿2012 [14]. Households in both areas experienced 22% and 8% price increases, respectively. Energy costs erode the competitiveness of EU economies. Preliminary estimates of gas shale deposits in Poland are substantial [15].

Successful exploitation of shale gas in Poland will improve the energy security of the country as well as the whole EU. Energy security is an overriding motive clearly expressed by the government. Indeed, the current legal framework guiding the exploration and prospecting of hydrocarbons aims at protecting the energy interests of the country [16]. Society at large perceives the current dependence on imported energy as a potential existential threat. Outside observers underestimate public sentiments regarding the importance of energy security and the choice between opportunities to use domestic resources vs. imported resources, even if such imports would originate from multiple sources. These considerations lead to the question of whether to begin shale gas extraction. Do benefits and opportunities resulting from shale gas exploitation, an energy source promising to improve Poland⿿s energy balance, exceed the costs and risks associated with such a venture? This study examines benefits, costs, opportunities, and threats linked to exploitation shale gas by applying the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) to this multifaceted issue associated with not only tangible, but non-tangible effects. The AHP is uniquely suited to apply rigor to the choice of alternatives. This analytical tool has not been previously used in formulating a gas security strategy in Poland. Indeed, the recent political developments outside Poland (the conflict between Ukraine and Russia) and the election of the first majority government since the transition to a market economy force the energy security issue to the forefront of problems faced by Poland and render some earlier discussions obsolete [17]. The current study applies a rigorous approach to a complex and controversial debate in an attempt to shape the energy policy in the country.

1.1. Status quo of the energy production and opportunities for shale gas exploitation in Poland
Shale gas is one of unconventional natural gas types and is present in shale. Shale gas extraction revolutionized the commercial natural gas production in North America, especially in the United States. Canada⿿s deposits, estimated at 16.23 billion cubic meters, are scattered throughout the country, from British Columbia to Nova Scotia [18]. Projections show that the share of shale gas in the world⿿s total natural gas production can reach 23% in 2035, up from 13% in 2009.

Europe also has great potential in exploitation shale gas and an opportunity to alter the observed trends in energy supply. Deposits in Europe are estimated at 25 billion cubic meters [19]. Trial drilling has been conducted in a number of European countries. Poland has witnessed an unprecedented interest in shale gas exploration. Many experts maintain that Polish unconventional gas deposits have the potential of becoming of key importance in Central Europe. The deposits stretch from the Baltic Sea coast, between Slupsk and Gdansk, in the direction of Warsaw and farther to the area around Lublin and Zamosc in southeastern Poland. The total area (Fig. 1) consists of the so called Baltic, Podlaskie, and Lubelskie basins [20]. Quite a few energy corporations (among them, ExxonMobil, Marathon, Chevron, ConocoPhillips, and PGNiG SA [21]) have been actively involved in conducting trial drilling there. Fig. 2 shows various estimates of shale gas in Poland [22].

Several reports have been prepared describing the character of the deposits in recent years [23]. Some studies focused exclusively on hypothetical scenarios with regard to environmental effects, drawing conclusions for selected regions while applying assumptions simplifying real conditions [24], and warn against possible negative effects. The study of the actual environmental effects with regard to water quality in one of the most promising areas of shale gas extraction in Poland [25] showed that shale gas exploration did not affect water quality. A system of water testing and quality monitoring in the zone of drinking water intake showed that water quality meets Poland⿿s and WHO water standards. Water quality and waste water management due to shale gas extraction have been studied and solutions have been offered that maximize protection while reducing regulatory complexity [26].

Poland will require substantial investment to modernize existing coal and lignite burning power plants in the foreseeable future. Shale gas offers opportunities not only to improve the country⿿s energy security, but to lower the emissions associated with the solid fuel burning. The country reached a compromise in the area of long-term reduction of CO2 emissions and the goal is to decrease them by 40% (of 1990 levels) by 20301[20]. In return, the country received 7.5 bln PLN ($1.98 bln) [27] to modernize its energy sector by 2030 [28]. To achieve the EC goals requires a reduction of coal use or modernization of coal power plants and an increase in renewable energy use [29]. Nearly 45% of power generating equipment is at least 30 years old and 77% is older than 20 years. Energy production and utilization efficiency is 2.5 times higher than the average in 27 EU countries [30]. Additionally, Instytut Studiow Ekonomicznych (Economic Studies Institute in Warsaw) estimates the costs associated with pollution and health care resulting from coal use between 700 mln PLN and 2.2 bln PLN (approximately $185⿿580 mln at July 1, 2015 exchange rate) [27], depending on the scenario, in the period 1990⿿2012 [19]. The implementation of the EC goals will increase energy prices to final users by 30% disregarding inflation [19]. To meet the EC goals requires closing all lignite-burning power plants and 90% of coal-burning power plants and replacing them with gas burning power plants by 2030. Assuming an adequate number of power plants can be built, the Polish energy sector would use about 30 billion cubic meters of natural gas annually. The current usage is 14 billion cubic meters [19] and the majority of it is imported.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The Section 2.1 describes the choice of the AHP technique, its application in the decision selection studies, and its suitability to the problem at hand. Section 2.2 provides a description of the interviews with experts expressing their preferences regarding the energy security of the country. Next, Section 3 reports on calculations of weights for each level of decision hierarchy tree. Section 4 presents the results in terms of benefits (B), opportunities (o), costs (C), and risks (R) and the calculation of numerical values of the three alternatives. It is followed by conclusions.

2. Materials and methods
2.1. The choice of the AHP method
The selection of the best alternative in the process of decision-making is complex because it involves numerous quantifiable and non-quantifiable factors, some of the latter quite ephemeral in their nature [31]. To select the best gas security strategy for Poland requires delineating the problem, identifying alternatives, establishing a clear goal, selecting factors relevant to the solution, completing a comparison across factors, and considering effectiveness of implementation of the selected policies. Several techniques have been developed to aid the decision selection process and account for quantifiable and psychological reasons reflected in opinions and sentiments. The Analytical Hierarchy Procedure (AHP) offers a comprehensive and structured approach to complex, group decision-making. The technique allows to narrow choice to the best (rather than ⿿right⿿) alternative by assuming that judgements can be used to perform evaluation of presented alternatives.

The AHP method is a multi-criterion decision support procedure [32]. The framework requires the construction of a hierarchy of decisions that is presented to decision-makers (or experts in the case of this study) for systematic evaluation. A complex problem is decomposed into comprehensible sub-problems. Decision-makers use their judgement about the importance of presented sub-problems through a series of pairwise comparisons. The procedure does not require that the compared issues be independent; after all, the technique merges mathematics and psychology, which is the essence of the AHP and distinguishes this technique from other multi-criteria decision-making tools. The impartiality of experts⿿ responses is verified by the calculation of consistency ratio (CR) after the comparisons of the sub-problems are expressed in numerical values and responses from respondents who fail the test are omitted from the analysis.

Each evaluation by an expert in the hierarchy is assigned a numerical weight. With the application of computer software, the large number of varying elements is compared in a rational way. The method verifies the consistency of evaluations (the consistency ratio, CR) made by each expert and eliminates observations not meeting that criterion. Lastly, the calculation of numerical priorities assigns scores to each alternative, identifying the best choice. The process is aided by computer software; this study applies Expert Choice, Inc. software.

To compare qualitative (subjective) values expressed by experts, the values have to be converted into numerical form. Only then can they be placed in the comparison matrix. The conversion is accomplished using the fundamental comparison scale [33], [34]. The scale permits inclusion of the decision-maker⿿s experience and knowledge indicating how the selected element prevails over other elements with regard to a given criterion. A person can express preferences concerning each pair of elements using verbal qualifiers: equally important, weak-to-moderate advantage of one over the other, strong advantage, very strong advantage, and extreme advantage. The qualifiers are then coded as 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9.

This method recommends the best alternative for application if the corresponding priority function has the highest total value. In the hierarchy tree, the goal is listed at level one. Specific criteria are placed at the second level and are subject to pairwise comparison with the main goal. The comparison determines the domination or advantage of one element over the other. Sub-criteria are also compared pairwise at the third level. The fourth level involves the alternatives or decisions to be implemented.

The AHP has been applied to a large number of empirical questions involving choice among specified alternatives. Among recent studies is an application in the strategic environmental management planning [35]. Another recent study dealt with building a sustainable outsourcing framework using a scoring method [36]. In Polish AHP literature, one study focused on a very controversial policy decision regarding the adoption of the euro as the national currency [37]. The current study accounts for critical economic, social, political, and environmental aspects associated with the energy security and shale gas exploitation in Poland. A literature search has not yielded a similarly comprehensive study on this topic, although shale gas exploitation was subject of studies focused on legal and environmental issues [for example [21]].

2.2. The survey of experts
The first stage of developing the strategy involved a survey of several experts from academia and industry who are knowledgeable of the energy sector in Poland. In this study, the survey participants included two experts from Cracow University of Science and Technology (AGH), two experts from the Polish Geological Institute (PIG-PIB), and seven from the gas industry. All interviews were conducted in May 2015. Each expert responded to 118 questions contained in a survey instrument prepared in accordance with the AHP method [38]. The face-to-face interview lasted 2⿿2.5 h as respondents were making pairwise comparisons of presented criteria and sub-criteria. Respondents expressed their own preference with regard to each criterion in comparison with other criteria on the scale from absolute to weak advantage or equal weight with regard to the energy security of the country. The survey included the phrase ⿿which of the listed criteria is more important in solving the presented problem?⿿ and required the respondent to select the specific point on the scale ranging from ⿿absolute advantage⿿ to ⿿equally important.⿿ Each expert made 24 pairwise comparisons for each main criterion and 1485 pairwise comparisons of sub-criteria. The selected responses were coded numerically using Saaty⿿s fundamental numerical scale ranging from 1 to 9 [39]. Following the data collection, the responses were verified by calculating the consistency ratio (CR). As suggested [38], the value of CR exceeding 10% in the completed questionnaire in the case of more than five sub-criteria suggests dropping the respondent from the dataset. Ultimately, this study uses responses from seven experts, two from academia, one from the PIG-PIB, and four from industry.

Calculations of quantified priorities for main criteria, sub-criteria, and models were obtained using Expert Choice software. The investigation was conducted using the AHP method accounting for Benefits (B), Opportunities (O), Costs (C), and Risks (R). Results show quantified priorities with regard to main criteria and sub-criteria that are most influential in improving energy security as a result of shale gas exploration in Poland.

The following section shows elements influencing benefits resulting from the improved energy security of the country. Tables 1⿿8 list main criteria and sub-criteria subject to comparisons performed by a group of experts. The value of a priority is provided for each criterion (the strength of an effect on the main goal).
The AHP method models four merits, i.e., benefits that can be achieved from implementing a gas security strategy for Poland; opportunities or probable benefits; costs that incur as a result of strategy implementation; and risks or hidden costs that may occur. The main goal (level one) lists models of the four merits associated with energy security improvement due to shale gas exploration (Tables 1⿿8). This is the situation desired by the decision-maker and it can materialize through the choice of the best alternative.

The second level in the hierarchy tree consists of the main criteria that correspond to four aspects of gas security either because of shale gas exploitation or imports. They include a political aspect, which describes implications of a given alternative for international relations; an economic aspect that describes implications stemming from a given alternative for the national economy stability/security; a social aspect that captures implications resulting from a given alternative for society at large; and an environmental aspect that describes implications a given alternative has for the natural environment.

The third level involves sub-criteria that vary in each of the four modeled merits and that are applied to evaluate three alternatives or decisions pertaining to the improvement of gas security in Poland. The fourth level is the three alternatives/decisions and the best is chosen from among them (Tables 1, 3, 5 and 7).

Tables 1⿿8 (in two sets of even and odd numbers) show the main criteria and sub-criteria subject to comparisons made by experts considered relevant to energy security of the country. The values of quantified priorities corresponding to each criterion are presented in Tables 2, 4, 6, and 8. The values reflect the effect on the main goal; positive in the case of ⿿benefits⿿ and ⿿opportunities⿿, and negative in the case of ⿿costs⿿ and ⿿risks.⿿

In the case of the AHP ⿿benefits⿿ model, the most important criteria in the context of gas security are factors classified as ⿿economic⿿ (Table 2), which experts have assigned the weight of 0.53. A somewhat less important criterion is one encompassing ⿿political⿿ factors (weight of 0.28). The third most important group of factors includes ⿿environmental⿿ aspects, which have the weight of 0.12. In the opinion of experts, the ⿿social⿿ criterion has the least weight among the four and equals 0.07.

The next stage in the search of the best alternative for improving the energy security of the country is the calculation of local priorities for sub-criteria corresponding to each main criterion. All calculations were obtained using Expert Choice, Inc. software. For example, Table 2 shows the calculated local priorities regarding the ⿿economic⿿ criterion. As can be seen, the most important sub-criterion is ⿿Achieving energy self-sufficiency⿿ (weight 0.53). The emphasis on self-sufficiency in gas supplies seems by far the most important issue to respondents reflecting the international tensions and their economic effects at the time of conducting the survey. Vital sub-criteria are also ⿿Limiting the dependence on gas imports⿿ (weight 0.21) and ⿿Improvement of energy balance and balance of payment of the country⿿ (weight 0.16). Two less essential criteria are ⿿Independence from foreign energy suppliers⿿ and ⿿Assurance of energy security by guaranteeing uninterrupted supplies.⿿ Limiting dependence on gas imports accounts for possible instability of imports due to various factors, including the logistics and pricing, while the independence for foreign suppliers reflects the past heavy dependence on piped natural gas from Russia and very limited technical capacity to obtain imported gas from other geographical directions. The conditions have been eased with the LNG terminal in Swinoujscie that has begun to operate recently.

⿿Opportunities⿿ have been associated with the strengthening of the Polish firms engaged in the exploitation of shale gas deposits and the expected profits. Additionally, increased exports opportunities to other European (mostly EU) countries have been perceived favorably be respondents and may reflect the persistent dependence of the whole EU on energy feedstock imports. The ⿿social⿿ criterion is primarily associated with expectations of contributing to the life of local communities by firms exploiting shale gas in the area. Such contribution would help offset the possible changes in quality of life specific to a particular area.

For respondents, the most important element of ⿿risk⿿ within the criterion ⿿environment⿿ is ⿿Too intensive exploration of the resource, pollution of drinking water reservoirs,⿿ which was assigned the weight of 0.56 (Table 8). In the case of ⿿political⿿ criteria the highest weight of 0.51 is assigned to sub-criterion ⿿Industry and state lobbying in EU organs.⿿ Finally, in the case of ⿿economic⿿ criteria, the most important sub-criterion is ⿿Lack of analysis of shale gas exploration effects on other activities,⿿ weight 0.51.

4. Results and discussion
4.1. ⿿Benefits⿿ analysis due to improvement of energy security
All coded responses of experts were used to calculate a geometric mean. Expert Choice software [40] enabled calculations of priorities or weights of each strategic criterion and sub-criterion. The software was first used to calculate local priorities leading to the main goal. Local priorities apply to the level above the level at which the criteria are being compared. The next step involved the calculation of global priorities for each sub-criterion. The value of global priority is the share of a given sub-criterion in the total process of Poland⿿s energy balance improvement. The shares refer to the main goal placed at the top of the hierarchy tree and are the product of a quantified priority of the main goal by the sub-criterion weight. Later, the global priorities allowed the comparison of each model with respect to every sub-criterion.

4.2. Strategic decision alternatives in the context of ⿿benefits⿿ (B), ⿿opportunities⿿ (O), ⿿costs⿿ (C), and ⿿risks⿿ (R)
4.2.1. Decision alternatives securing gas supply for Poland
The fourth AHP level involves the development of strategic alternatives. Shale gas offers the opportunity to reduce the extraction of coal and lignite that currently dominates energy generation. A number of countries, including some former socialist economies (for example, Hungary, Bulgaria) constructed nuclear plants and obtain a large share of electricity from such facilities. Nuclear power generation as an alternative is associated with some of the problems that characterize the current dependence on imported natural gas. Nuclear power would make Poland fully dependent on foreign suppliers and expertise. First, Poland does not have uranium ore that can be commercially produced. Attempts to mine uranium after World War II in southwestern Poland were abandoned. The only suppliers are other countries including Russia and, consequently, the dependence on foreign suppliers remains unchanged, except that it would account for a different feedstock. Second, the dependence on imports could be less constraining in the short run, but would require maintenance of adequate inventory of suitable feedstock for a nuclear plant. Inventory maintenance and safety is costly. Third, Poland lacks expertise in the construction, maintenance, and operation of a nuclear power plant. Again, this will likely require a continuous foreign presence and expertise. Such dependence seems to contradict the notion of energy security and the risk of uninterrupted supplies because the foreign supplier is likely to represent a commercial company, which is governed by commercial conditions, and special guarantees are uncertain. Fourth, nuclear plant waste requires special handling including transportation and storage adding to costs. Fifth, the public may not readily accept the option of nuclear power that does not alter the dependence on foreign suppliers. It was public opinion that has forced similar plans in the past to be abandoned a little over two decades ago. Moreover, after the nuclear accident in Japan, Poland⿿s neighbor ⿿ Germany ⿿ abandoned its nuclear power development yielding to public pressure.

Renewable energy production has been increasing in Poland and the country is required to increase the share of this type of energy to 14% by 2020. Although there are many sources of renewable energy, Poland either utilizes some sources on a scale permitted by natural conditions (e.g., hydroelectric power), or develops it through a subsidy program (e.g., solar energy) [41]. The rapid expansion of wind mills frequently faces opposition from local residents [42] and the newly adopted law (April 2016) about renewable energy is expected to dramatically slow the expansion.

Neither nuclear power generation, nor renewable energy is a viable alternative given the country⿿s conditions. Therefore, the study limits the number of alternatives to three. Needless to say, the larger the number of alternatives, the more involved and demanding is the process of interviewing the respondents. All alternatives included in the study satisfy the main criteria of the model (level II) and sub-criteria (level III).

Alternative A ⿿ shale gas extraction from domestic deposits ⿿ assumes that shale gas deposits are the most promising energy source in the country and the deposits can change the determinants of energy security in a meaningful way. Alternative B ⿿ diversification of gas supply sources ⿿ implies the diversification of supply sources through the expansion of alternative gas distribution pipelines reaching Poland, the use of an LNG terminal in the port of Swinoujscie in the Baltic Sea, and expansion of gas storage capacity. Alternative C ⿿ maintaining the status quo ⿿ assumes an unchanged structure of the gas supply system.

4.2.2. Value of strategic decision alternatives in the context of BOCR
Choosing the best approach to energy security involves a pairwise comparison of alternatives with regard to all sub-criteria. Next, the calculation of relative value of strategic alternatives is made in the context of BOCR. Table 9 shows the results. In the area of ⿿benefits⿿, the highest priority was assigned to alternative A (weight 0.49), followed by alternative C (weight 0.27). The lowest weight 0.24 is received by alternative B. For all alternatives, the most important sub-criterion was ⿿economic,⿿ assigned the weight of 0.29, 0.12, and 0.12 for alternatives A, B and C, respectively. If ⿿benefits⿿ were the only sub-criterion, then undoubtedly the choice would have been alternative A.
In the area of ⿿opportunities⿿, alternative A, receives the highest 0.37 wt, closely followed by B, 0.34. Alternative C places third with a weight of 0.29. The most important sub-criterion is ⿿economic⿿ with values of 0.22, 0.18, and 0.18 for A, B, and C, respectively.

The model associated with alternative C receives the largest weight, 0.36, in the area of ⿿costs.⿿ In other words, the result suggests that retaining the status quo is the most costly option. The other two alternatives are less costly although the difference is not large. The weight assigned to alternative A is 0.34 and alternative B is 0.30. For all alternatives, the sub-criterion ⿿environmental⿿ has the largest weights equal to 0.36, 0.22, and 0.19 for A, B, and C, respectively. Among environmental effects, a frequently discussed issue is that of changes in water quality, but the study in the most attractive shale gas exploitation area failed to show any negative effects [31].

The results do not unequivocally favor a single alternative decision A, B, or C. To calculate the result identifying the best alternative Saaty [34] proposes the following formula:
(1)
where x is the numerical value of the decision, BxO is the total value of ⿿benefits⿿ and ⿿opportunities⿿ of a given decision, and CxR is the total value of ⿿costs⿿ and ⿿risks⿿ of a given alternative.

Table 10 shows the numerical values of the three alternatives regarding energy security for Poland. The highest value indicates the most preferred alternative, which in the case of this study is alternative A, or the extraction of shale gas from domestic deposits (x = 1.12). The diversification of gas supply sources, alternative B, has a value of x = 1.00. The least preferred is alternative C associated with maintaining the status quo (x = 0.80). The status quo⿿s lowest score suggests that it has been viewed as least likely and this is consistent with the pressure to lower CO2 emissions and the cost competiveness of coal and lignite as energy feedstock. The diversification of gas supply sources as an alternative to gas security is the second preferred alternative and this strategy has been pursued by Poland for a while. A special new LNG terminal was built in Swinoujscie harbor allowing ships carrying LNG to deliver LNG from Norway, the United States, and the Persian Gulf. Indeed, the first ship entered the terminal on June 18, 2016. Yet, the diversification of supply sources is different from the utilization of domestic deposits of shale gas. The utilization of domestic resources to fully satisfy domestic gas energy has a broad appeal. It would create a new domestic industry generating jobs. Poland⿿s unemployment rate remains high and its decrease has been dependent on outmigration, both permanent and seasonal, to EU member countries characterized with a higher per capita income than Poland. If the experts favored this alternative and were inconsistent in their comparisons of the presented sub-criteria, they were omitted, but that alternative would likely appeal to the general public.
The recommendation from this study favoring shale gas deposits development is clear and both A and B alternatives have substantially higher scores than alternative C. The government policy so far has adopted a piecemeal approach. The government coalition leading until October 2015 passed a law guiding the development of renewable energy resources. That law was been modified in April 2016. The new approach seems to respond to the continuing protests of coalminer unions and stresses the utilization of alternative renewable feedstock in the form of co-burning with solid fuels. Neither government addressed the constraints of domestic shale gas exploration.

5. Conclusions
Energy cost and the threats to disrupt the gas supply erode the competitiveness of EU economies. Successful exploitation of shale gas in Poland will improve the energy security of the country as well as the whole EU. The presence of sizable shale gas deposits in Poland and the flourishing of shale gas extraction in EU countries (e.g., the United Kingdom) create new opportunities. Shale gas extraction offers benefits, but is not without risks as is any economic activity. This study examined the advantages and disadvantages of shale gas extraction using the AHP, which is uniquely suited to convert the expressed sentiments, feelings and opinions into rigorously obtained numerical values leading to the selection of the best alternative.

The focus of the study, i.e., the improvement of gas security can be achieved by the exploitation of domestic shale gas deposits, diversification of supply sources, or by maintaining the status quo. The alternatives have been compared applying four criteria, i.e., political, economic, environmental, and social, each further divided into several subcriteria. Respondents, who were government, academe, and research institute energy experts, expressed their own preference with regard to each criterion through a series of comparisons. The selected responses were coded numerically following the data collection and the responses were verified by calculating the consistency ratio (CR).

The most important criteria in the context of gas security are factors classified as ⿿economic⿿ (Table 2), which experts have assigned the weight of 0.53, almost twice the size of the second largest weight allotted to ⿿political⿿ criteria. The calculated weights for each ⿿criterion⿿ given the BPCR framework were used to calculate scores associated with each of the three alternatives.

In the area of ⿿benefits⿿, the highest priority was assigned to alternative A (weight 0.49), while in the area of ⿿opportunities⿿, alternative A, also receives the highest 0.37 wt. The model associated with alternative C receives the largest weight, 0.36, in the area of ⿿costs.⿿ In other words, the result suggests that retaining the status quo is the most costly option. For all alternatives, the sub-criterion ⿿environmental⿿ has the largest weights equal to 0.36, 0.22, and 0.19 for A, B, and C, respectively. The numerical value among the three alternatives regarding energy security for Poland in this study is the highest for alternative A, or the extraction of shale gas from domestic deposits (x = 1.12). This is the best path to improve the gas security and, by extension, energy security for the country.

The recent decline of energy prices, especially oil prices, is unlikely to persist. Although the current price level renders shale gas extraction costly, the increase of oil prices and other energy resources is expected and will affect economic calculations. Additionally, the strong preference for energy supply stability, including the reliability of suppliers, suggests that decision-makers in both public and private sectors will closely monitor developments and re-evaluate the expansion of shale gas extraction in Poland. The current vigorous debate and revisions of the direction of the energy sector development will further clarify the approach to energy security and the role of shale gas exploitation in the country.

Future studies can benefit from involving a larger group of research experts. This study involved interviews with eleven experts, but the CR test results led to the inclusion of responses from seven of them. Given the highly specialized topic and the character of university research, finding experts is much easier in the industry than academe and, especially, in government. However, since the shale gas issue remains current, it is plausible that the number of competent experts has been increasing and a similar future project could involve a larger number of respondents. The selected sub-criteria can be expanded and narrowed allowing for researchers to evaluate specific outcomes, while accounting for possible differentiated regional effects. The process of identifying the sub-criteria can involve comments from professionals in each of the four areas encompassed by criteria, i.e., political, economic, environmental, and social.