Bangladesh is planning to build a series of coal-fired power plants to meet the increasing gap between its energy demand and supply. The energy mix of the country is dominated by natural gas but as supplies have begun to dwindle, the pressures of diversification has opened up the window for an expansion of coal. But this expansion is being met with stiff resistance from civil society and local communities that are facing the potential of a power plant in their areas. Issues of environmental degradation, land grabbing, corruption and crony capitalism are playing out within an increasingly complex political economy of coal. The Government’s plan to increase the share of coal in the electricity mix from its current 2%–40% by 2021 represents a paradigm shift in energy infrastructure, but it remains to be seen if this shift will take its toll on peoples lives, their livelihoods and the democratic functioning of the country. This short communication will explore these aspects with the recent killing of 4 protestors of a proposed coal plant, at its center.
On the morning of April 4th, 2016, Zaker Hossain woke up in a state of anxiety. A 37 year-old salt cultivator from the remote village of Gandamara in the Chittagong district of Bangladesh, Zaker was going to take part in a peoples protest that day. On April 3rd, a day before, 7 others of his community were arrested for obstructing the entry of a few company officials of a coal fired thermal power plant into their area. Zaker and 1500 others had gathered under the banner Boshot vita rokkha Committee (committee to protect households) to demand the release of the arrested. What began as a peaceful protest soon turned violent as the police opened fire and Zaker found himself in their crosshairs. He was critically injured and was pronounced dead upon arrival at the hospital. The police had fired over 700 rounds at the gathering, leaving hundreds injured. That day, Zaker Hossain along with Murtaza Ali (62), Zaker Ahmed (60) and Anwarul Islam (55) joined an alarming and increasing list of victims of state violence, against dissenters of coal based energy.

Bangladesh, a small yet densely populated nation is pursuing a rapid expansion of coal based infrastructure for bringing economic growth. It was only a decade ago on August 26th, 2006 that 3 people were shot dead by paramilitary forces in the district of Phulbari, where 5000 people had gathered to protest against an open-pit coal mine. The incident resulted in a ban on mining in Phulbari but the struggle has not ended. GCM resources (formerly Asia Energy Corporation), a London based company which is invested in the mining operations has continued to pile up pressure on the Bangladesh Government and is expecting the necessary approvals soon.

The movement against open-pit mining has been strong and the Phulbari struggle has gained worldwide attention, forcing the Government to adopt greater caution. But the recent horror of killings in Banshkhali (the county where the shootings took place) has been met with little sympathy from the country’s leaders. The Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina dismissed the opposition to coal based energy as baseless and bizarre imaginations of a few people. Invoking the fact that a coal plant exists even in Oxford, she seemed to indicate that coal is safe and essential for development.1 A 15-day moratorium was put on any further work at the site but the Government has made its intentions clear that the coal plant would be built at the designated site.

2. Bangladeshi energy scenario
With an installed generation capacity of 12.3 GW, Bangladesh has one of the lowest per capita energy consumption of 320 kW h in the world. Coal only contributes 2% of this generation capacity with a bulk of it (62%) coming from domestic natural gas. Furnace oil and diesel make up an additional 29% of the generation capacity. But with fears of dwindling gas supplies and the need for diversifying the energy mix, the emphasis has shifted to exploiting coal. The country’s Power System Master Plan (PSMP-2010), developed jointly by the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and TEPCO, offers an energy road map that the country is building its plans on [1]. The PSMP projects a capacity addition of 40 GW by 2030 and 60 GW by 2040 with a mix of 50% coal, 25% gas and the rest from a variety of sources.

A third of the population still does not have access to electricity and those who do, receive an intermittent and poor supply. On November 2nd, 2014 the entire country was plunged into darkness when the failing of a transmission line from India had a cascading effect on the national grid, which remains in dire need of modernization. Bangladesh certainly acknowledges the need for more energy at affordable costs but given the tough political choice of approving domestic coal mining in densely populated areas, the Government is turning to imported coal and finance from its neighbors. India, China and Japan have signed agreements with both the public and private sector in Bangladesh to set up thermal power plants.

24 coal-fired stations amounting to 20 GW are in the pipeline and at various stages of approval and construction. Many of these plants were conceived during the early years of the incumbent party, the Bangladesh Awami League, which came to power in 2008, yet not a single plant is currently ready and generating power and many are mired in controversies.

Table 1 below highlights some of the big plants and their surrounding controversies.
3. Political economy of Bangladeshi coal
Having had a close experience with people’s movements against coal in India, I can safely claim that the political economy and social justice aspects of coal in Bangladesh are not entirely unique. The similarities are striking and offer us insights into the entrenched methods of the coal industry through their nexus with the local Governments in the subcontinent. The following section looks at some of the key recurring reasons behind coal protests through the example of the recent killings in Bangladesh and similar episodes in India.

3.1. Weak energy governance
Bangladesh has a litany of energy deals gone sour with multinational firms like Chevron and Conocophillips setting the rules of the game. Actual costs of gas projects for instance have been 10–30 times higher than the initial estimated costs. Owing to a lack of indigenous technical capabilities, the state oil company Petrobangla has offered its gas reserves on auction but multinational firms are hesitant to move in without the right incentives. The Government has been forced to increase wellhead prices, introduce tax holidays, increase payments for cost recovery, remove duties on imported machinery and bring in opportunities for contractors to sell to third party buyers. With Bangladesh struggling to keep control of its own resources, its recent victory over India to secure rights over a 20,000 sq. km area rich in natural gas might well end up as another case of the resource curse [3].

As economist Joseph stiglitz remarked, “A country that sells off its natural resources, privatizes its oil company, and borrows against future revenues, may experience a consumption binge that raises GDP, but the accounting framework should show that the country has actually become poorer. In many developing countries, privatization is tantamount to selling the natural resources to foreign firms, since there are no domestic firms with the capital and skills necessary to undertake the task of ex-traction. A country like Bangladesh, with limited reserves of natural gas, might want to exercise caution when selling its gas, given that there is no other effective way of insuring itself against an increase in the price of energy over the long run” [4].

It is hard to imagine why the coal sector might be any different as the Government continues to lay out the red carpet for further investments in exploiting domestic resources. If it was not for the sustained struggle against Phulbari open-pit mining, the terms of agreement struck by GCM Resources would have allowed for 75–80% of the extracted coal to be exported through the Sunderban mangrove forest with a mere 6% royalty to Bangladesh.

Another point of significance is the geopolitics in the SAARC (South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation) grouping. Nations like Bangladesh have become political battlegrounds for India and China where each is wrestling the other for greater economic and political influence in the broader region. Both nations are expanding their economic might in Bangladesh by supporting large infrastructure projects and funneling development aid. The result, as we have seen in the case of Sri Lanka, is an unmanageable national debt and the inevitable political compromises that follow. Nearly 70% of Sri Lanka’s infrastructure projects are funded by China, tripling its foreign debt, and when a new Government took over in 2015 they were forced to take financial decisions against their own interest; accepting the demands of the Chinese to avoid a further debt trap. For a small country like Bangladesh with weak institutional power, there is little scope to push back on political pressure from bigger economies and that often translates to putting the interests of capital before that of the people [5].

3.2. Violations of environmental norms
A fundamental requirement of any big infrastructure project is an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) that validates its impacts on the local environment. Mandated to be carried out by a third party with no conflict of interest; the EIA is a key report that determines the approval for a project. The Banshkhali power plant for instance did not have an EIA and yet the developers began the process of land acquisition. The site for the Rampal power plant in Khulna district, a mere 14 km’s away from the Sunderbans, violates another basic environmental norm which stipulates a buffer zone of 25 km’s around a coal plant. 1834 acres of land was acquired prior to the EIA approval.

Multiple cases of spurious EIA’s have been documented in India where shoddy ‘copy-paste’ jobs are presented for approval. Owing to the large number of projects that are often overseen by small committees, the best intentions of the project proponent are assumed. The lack of an EIA is hardly a deterrent for the development of a project and that highlights a clear disregard for local environmental impacts [6].

3.3. Refusal to engage public through consultations
Public consultations are indispensable within any democratic country for deciding on projects of a wider social consequence. The Banshkhali killings was another case where local authorities and project developers refused to engage with the public to allay their fears. Instead, in what can be described as an absolute travesty of justice, the local administration falsified data to show that the project area had only 150 households that might need rehabilitation when in reality nearly 7000 households lived in the area alongside religious, educational, health and trade institutions. Many of the local citizens who were either salt and shrimp cultivators or other agro-farmers, demanded dialogue on relocating the plant and returning their lands but the authorities expressed little concern for their needs [7].

Previous cases of land grabbing have left communities with a deep sense of distrust for large projects and its consequence on their livelihoods. Coal plants, particularly in India, have a notorious history of poor public engagement to avoid any further delays in their project timelines.

3.4. The myth of jobs
The opportunity to gain new jobs and improve one’s social mobility is an undeniably enticing offer but the picture painted by the coal industry is often untrue. The Banshkhali plant was promoted by S Alam industries, a powerful conglomerate, to offer 1000 permanent jobs upon completion. For a project that could potentially jeopardize the livelihoods of 7000 households, the offer was pitiful.

Many projects in India were sold to local communities on the jobs they would offer but in reality, owing to their poor formal education, many locals are employed on a part time basis as sweepers and security guards at the plant site. Often, cheaper labor is brought in from other parts of the country.

3.5. Elitism and exclusion
A recourse that is often taken by coal mining and generation companies is the notion of the fait accompli. Companies begin operations before the requisite permissions are provided and when matters land on the hands of judicial authorities, the vast amount of committed resources tends to swing the case in the developers favor. A case in point is the aftermath of Indian coal scam of 2012 that revealed how a large number of coal blocks in India were allocated at massively low prices to certain private industries. The industries went on to invest vast sums of money into building thermal plants that were expected to run on the coal mined from the allocated blocks, all the while when environmental clearances for mining were yet to be given. The Government and the courts felt compelled to rule in favor of the industry in certain cases and grant mining rights [8].

3.6. Coopting the narrative on development
One of the most powerful tools that the industry and often the Governments use is the power of narrative. The mainstream narrative of development overshadows matters of livelihood, rehabilitation and death. Powerful and far-reaching media outlets assume the role of an aide in strengthening this narrative that inevitably polarizes an audience to either choose the side of development or go against it. Such a narrative when driven from the top echelons of Government carries a strong signal both for businesses and the wider civil society.

The implications of curbing debate in a democracy will ultimately be the loss of critical thinking and a difficulty in imagining possible alternatives. Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s statements after the killing in Banshkhali and her unshaken belief in the current path of development reveal how strong narratives are used to shape public discourse.

3.7. Lack of transparency and accountability
Coal plants in the subcontinent have often displaced hundreds and thousands of people. GCM’s own estimates suggest that the Phulbari coalmine, if approved, would displace 50,000 indigenous people from 23 villages. An independent expert committee set up by the Government estimated 130,000 people would be immediately affected [9]. As more plants are given clearances and given the country’s very high population density, this number can be expected to go up.

Companies are often let off the hook when adequate accountability measures are not applied on their promises of rehabilitation and resettlement. This has become emblematic of big infrastructure projects in India where an estimated 50–60 million people may have been internally displaced since independence. That is four times larger than the number of people that migrated during the country’s partition [10].

The selling point of cheap energy from coal belies the fact that societal and environmental costs of it especially in a place like Bangladesh can be very high. If basic principles of democracy are kept in abeyance for allowing the exploitation of natural resources, it is hard to expect negative externalities being factored into companies’ costs.

3.8. Corruption and crony capitalism
Bangladesh has faced repeated set backs through political and economic unrest. People carry a strong perception of the Government as corrupt and Bangladesh ranks a lowly 139 out of the 160 countries on transparency international’s corruption perception index. If a recent World Bank report can be considered, the country’s political violence in the first 3 months of 2015 resulted in a loss of $2.2 billion or 2% of the GDP [11]. The violence which was the result of corruption associated in the elections that brought the current Government to power persists, and when it comes to resource extraction, political instability in a country with weak infrastructure and undeveloped institutions is a recipe for disaster. We have witnessed in the case of countries like Nigeria or the Republic of Congo where multinationals and big domestic industries function in cahoots to stake claims over natural resources.

Professor Anu Mohammad, a distinguished economist and member secretary of the National Committee to Protect Oil Gas and other Natural Resources in Bangladesh spoke to this author about the recent killings in Banshkhali. “This project (Banshkhali thermal plant) is another example of Government-private sector nexus. The Government machinery seemed overenthusiastic in all stages, from land office to police. The energy adviser and the Prime minister by expressing their determination to go with the project, after the killing, revealed their deep commitment for the company. The company owner was known to be Jamaat financier but has now become very close to the PM. The owner is also close relative of one of Awami League’s influential leader in Chittagong (the site of the plant).2”

4. Insights for energy researchers and policymakers
This work has yielded a few insights that might be useful for exploring topics of further research and for policy makers to consider. These center on (1) centralization and scale, (2) energy transitions, and (3) energy justice.

Firstly, the critiques levied here against coal seem not to apply to other, more distributed energy sources at the scale of community and households. Bangladesh has seen a dramatic increase in Solar Home Systems (SHS) over the last decade, with roughly 4.5 million households now owing a system. With falling costs and creative financing, the country is on the path to putting an SHS in the hands of the remaining third of its population that still lives in the dark. Studies have shown how growth in distributed solar has resulted in a variety of micro-benefits starting from an absolute reduction of kerosene use for lighting, a decrease in indoor air pollution and a large number of direct and indirect jobs and income creation [12]. Yet solar constitutes a small fraction of the national energy mix with a 2.5% (160 MW) share of the total electricity. The Government has targeted a 10% share by 2021 but with a projected exponential rise in energy demand (24 GW by 2021 at a growth of 7% YoY), natural gas and coal are expected to make up the lion’s share.

The dichotomy that is evident in Bangladesh is between its aspiration for rapid, sustainable economic development and the means to achieve it. There is little research, for instance, on the potential for solar energy beyond SHS and irrigation pumps and it might partly be the result of a very high population density of the country that makes it difficult to imagine utility scale solar farms disrupting the energy basket anytime soon. The rhetoric of solar therefore stands in contrast with the reality of fossil fuel dependency and that is further evidence of the complex and imposing political economy around fossil fuels in the country.

Second, related to transitions, existing literature on socio-technical systems has emphasized the need for looking at technology from a systems point of view, considering the various ways in which it molds and is molded by the society it is situated in. The concept of hybrid forums [13] becomes useful when dealing with contestations within a socio-technical system. The controversy around coal plants in Bangladesh, which so far has been dismissed by the powerful with force, can instead be utilized to create a space for dialogue. Controversy can be a platform for learning and realigning the goals of a certain energy system, ensuring meaningful participation and operationalizing democracy.

Third, and lastly, from an energy justice point of view, the existing literature has focused on the distributional, procedural and representational aspects of justice [14]. These are important conceptual frameworks that have been introduced to better understand, appreciate and implement the ideas of justice in the context of energy. It is useful to acknowledge then, that incidents such as the killings in Banshkhali cuts straight through these concepts, highlighting what I might consider an absolute notion: that such gruesome violence is not merely unacceptable but large scale energy projects should not be built upon such violence. Such a notion becomes even more critical in light of the brazen dismissal of this incident and of peoples concerns by the Bangladesh Government that has pledged to continue with the project at the same site. Such incidents, when considered as a matter of governance, require a greater alignment of principles of justice across institutions and countries [15]. Finance, technology and technical expertise cannot remain neutral and in extreme cases, like the killing of dissenters, will assume the role of abettors.

5. Conclusion
In sum, the political economy of coal in Bangladesh is as complex as it is contested. The few people of Bangladesh that this author has spoken to do not share a blanket opposition to coal projects but they all demand greater transparency and rigorous implementation of legally bound procedures like the EIA and public consultations. It reveals a serious deficit of democratic space around fossil fuel based energy systems. Coal, particularly, has become a site of conflict in Bangladesh that symbolizes more than just energy; energy has become intertwined with grand (exclusionary) visions of development, protest movements and elitism.

Ultimately, the shootings in Banshkhali demand a moment of reflection on the paths to energy development that countries like Bangladesh espouse. This coal plant, if built, will embody violence at its heart. For the international community, the need of the hour is to support the space for democratic dissent that is shrinking and nurture new imaginations about energy development while simultaneously challenging the pressures of global capital on Bangladesh.