This article analyzes the coalmining opposition in the Czech Republic, a country with substantial brown coal production, high dependency on this fuel, massive exports in form of electricity, and a long and proud mining history. In 1991, the Czech government established so-called territorial ecological limits restricting production in the North Bohemian and Sokolov brown coal basins. The existence of these limits sparked a conflict between proponents of mining, desiring the valuable yet inaccessible reserves beyond the limits, and an opposition movement, ardently objecting to any extension of mining activities. This article focuses on the discursive level of this conflict, investigating how members of the opposition movement frame their own activity against coal to discover the main framing patterns within the opposition movement. Based on 39 semi-structured interviews conducted in 2017–2018, three frames emerged – the Local Impact frame, the Low-Carbon Transition frame, and the Anti-Systemic Environmental frame. These frames reveal that the opposition is driven by distinct complex narratives stemming from actors’ deeper ideological orientations. Moreover, the opposition is not homogeneous but consists of a variety of actors with different protest tactics. These findings support the growing literature questioning the Not-In-My-Backyard (NIMBY) narrative, echoed often by the pro-mining camp through the strategies and policies they implement. Furthermore, the research not only enriches our understanding of the local opposition but also helps to explain the long-term stalemate in coal-related debates in the Czech Republic.
While essential in shaping modern society, coal is now under heavy pressure. Climate change concerns are driving decarbonization pressures in national energy systems, and getting rid of coal is the easiest way to achieve lower carbon emissions [1]. Changes in coal production, however, usually face significant opposition. On one hand, opposition to phasing out coal is driven by the importance of mining for local communities [2] and their identity [3] or by national economic and energy supply concerns [4]. On the other hand, any projects extending coal utilization face resistance driven by environmental concerns [5] or concerns about local injustices [6]. While for some countries the main hurdle is in achieving a “just” transition [7], others still face the dilemma of whether the transition process should take place at all [5]. We contribute to the understanding of the latter through a case study of opposition to open-pit coal mining in the Czech Republic, a country with substantial brown coal production, high dependency on this fuel in energy production, massive exports of coal in the form of cross-border electricity trading, and a proud mining history [8]. The interaction among the opposition, industry and state institutions revolve around the issue of the territorial ecological limits on mining. Established in 1991, the limits have defined the areas where open-pit mining is allowed and where it is not [9]. A new social contract was thereby established, limiting environmental degradation [10] and offering the respective regions the prospect of a sustainable coal phase-out [11]. Nearly 30 years later, these expectations are far from being fulfilled. Instead of phase-out implementation, the limits have created an environment of ceaseless mobilization on the part of mining proponents, wanting high-quality and (technically) accessible coal, and their opponents, who resist any changes to the limits. The fact that the limits were established by non-binding government decree, along with other country-specific factors, facilitates the ongoing 15-year conflict [6]. The approach of proponents has largely been built on the assumption that the local populations behave rationally and calculate costs and benefits. “A new offer is needed. If an agreement is to be achieved we have to offer something to municipalities and their citizens,” claimed, for example, the CEO of the Czech Coal mining company in 2013 [12]. “I say ‘yes’ to mining provided that thorough compensation is ensured for municipalities and citizens,” agreed the President of the Ústí Regional Council that same year [13]. The dominance of this narrative has a far-reaching impact on energy-related decision-making in the country. When the opposition failed to respond to the rationalistic incentives and did not behave as expected, its members were often portrayed by the pro-mining camp as irrational and even extremist, lacking any sense of reasonable public policy or willingness to compromise [14,15]. Moreover, labels such as green terrorism were commonly used by industry representatives [16] and political elites [17,18]. Such depictions of selfishness, irresponsibility, and irrationality echo the NIMBY concept and, as such, attempt to delegitimize the opposition as well as environmental activism in general [19,20]. Previous research has shown a NIMBY-inspired approach addressing the opposition through compensation incentives to be unsuccessful, producing sub-optimal results in terms of consensus-building and creating tensions between the local and central governments instead of delivering a compromise between feuding parties [21]. Building on this literature, we question the presented understanding and portrayal of the mining opposition, which might prove exaggeratedly simplistic and ignorant of other intervening factors affecting the opposition’s character. We expect the opposition to represent a complex phenomenon influenced by multiple factors, including the discursive construction of the conflict, with NIMBY factors playing only a limited role [22,23]. In this paper, we investigate how participants active in the opposition movement against coal mining frame their own activity. A better understanding of how these frames are established and perpetuated is crucial for several reasons. First, frames define a problem in terms of causes and consequences and the involved actors as well as their roles, thus setting limits as to which actions and claims are regarded as legitimate and which are not [24]. Second, they mobilize collective action that aims to challenge (or reinforce) the status quo [25]. Third, these activities alter public perception of the problem and have the potential to influence agenda-setting as well as policymaking processes [26]. Based on the research of similar energy-related issues in the Czech setting [21], we formulate two specific research questions. First, we ask what specific framing patterns were used by the opposition in relation to coal mining. Second, we ask what were the main discursive cleavages within the coalmining opposition.
Conventional wisdom equates local opposition to land use projects with NIMBY syndrome [[27], [28], [29]]. This framework assumes a situation where local residents accept a project or some form of technology as a general idea but oppose it when a particular project is to be built in their vicinity. This phenomenon is explained as the result of individually rational actions, where individual costs substantially outweigh individual benefits, producing a collectively suboptimal outcome [30]. More vaguely, NIMBY has been described as opposition to socially beneficial facilities [27] or even as any opposition to site-specific projects [31]. This conceptual confusion has become the basis for critiques of the concept [22,27,29,32,33]. However, the literature on local opposition has rejected the NIMBY framework not only due to these conceptual deficiencies. NIMBY-based research has also been criticized for empirical [22,33,34] and normative reasons [27,32,35]. The former line of research has shown that evidence does not support the assumed association between geographical proximity and the oppositional attitudes of residents [34]. Rather, opposition has been shown to be based on principled grounds associated with what one scholar has termed the “Not-In-Anybody’s-Backyard” approach [20]. The normative critique has demonstrated how the NIMBY label suggests impressions of ignorance, irrationality, and selfishness that portray the opposition as an over-emotional, sometimes even undemocratic force, thereby delegitimizing its claims [21,23]. Additionally, the NIMBY framework assumes homogeneity among the opposition, whereby opponents’ actions follow a singular logic. In a narrow sense, it corresponds with the utilitarian concept of homo economicus, which posits that actions result from actors’ cost–benefit calculations [29]. More broadly, the opposition supposedly consists of individuals “misled” by different non-utilitarian incentives, ranging from a lack of knowledge [36] to irrational fear [37] or moral panic [38]. In contrast, we argue that the opposition “cannot be reduced to the activation of latent individually-held attitudes or beliefs” [21] but rather emerges from “potentially complex collective framing process” [39]. Framing processes are important both for mobilization and in terms of how protesters construct their identities. Thus, actors’ values and interests are shifted from homogenizing individual attributes to the space of the “struggles over meanings, identities, and interests” [40] that constitute them. Assumptions about the geographic homogeneity of the opposition are also imprecise [19]. “Local” opposition frequently involves non-local residents who provide resources and participate in campaigns and protest events [[40], [41], [42]]. Interdependent alliances emerge (typically among local groups, environmental movements, and NGOs). Colvin et al. [43] show how shared values of “self-transcendence” brought together diverse stakeholder groups, including farmers and environmental activists, to form the Lock the Gate Alliance opposing coalmining expansion in Australia. On the other hand, tensions over “radical and moderate forms of action, local versus non-local identities, [and/or] participatory versus professional models of the organization” are to be expected [41]. In sum, the NIMBY framework cannot be considered an adequate explanation of local opposition and often leads to ill-informed policies relying solely on economic incentives [44]. Post-NIMBY approaches provide a more suitable alternative framework which takes into account various socioeconomic, socio-psychological [43,45], and contextual factors [5,23,46]. One strand of the post-NIMBY literature focuses on the discursive level, which conditions what is deemed to be true and accordingly (de)legitimizes particular institutional arrangements [47,48]. Discourse is understood here as an “institutionalized use of language” [49] that produces a particular kind of knowledge about an issue [50]. Discursive struggles then set “the criteria of social classification, the boundaries of problem categories, the intersubjective interpretation of common experiences, the conceptual framing of problems, and the definitions of ideas that guide the ways people create the shared meanings which motivate them to act” [26]. Importantly, actors often use language strategically to (re)frame certain issues within a discourse to fit their interests. Such social constructions advanced through conflict embody presumptions about who or what caused the problem and who or what must change, or be changed, to solve it [51]. Thus, whereas discourse emerges from interactions, such as framing processes, among a multiplicity of actors and actor groups, frames are purposefully designed and promoted by (typically) socially and culturally defined groups [39]. Through framing, they actively position themselves as well as others [52] and struggle to establish a dominant discourse that would close the controversy in their favor. In this context, Usher’s [42] research on environmental framing of coal mining in England showed three prevailing frames – “custodial communitarianism” emphasizing the inherent value of the community, “global survivalism” calling for coordinated action to fight climate change, and “responsible resourcism” appealing to the “indispensable” economic benefits of mining and reconciliatory environmental management [42]. Such competing framings typically rest on deeper ideological footings [53] that further reinforce the conflict [21]. Eaton et al. [54] showed how local communities in northern Michigan, USA reframed national imaginaries on biomass energy to mobilize collective action. Related research subsequently documented how different framing strategies have been used in the broader political discourse [55,56]. In our research, we employ Snow and Bedford's [57] definition where frames are understood as “interpretive schemata” used to “simplify and condense the ‘world out there’”. They produce constructions of meaning through which “people come to embrace a particular version of reality” [39]. This is relevant for mobilization processes, where “collective action frames” function as “sets of beliefs … that inspire and legitimate the activities and campaigns” [25]. Frames fulfill diagnostic, prognostic, and motivational functions [58]. The diagnostic function defines the nature of the problem by identifying causal agents and attributes of blame and responsibility, implying differentiation between “good” (us) and “bad” (them). The prognostic function involves the proposed solution(s) to the problem. It further suggests strategies, tactics, and targets, thereby limiting the number of actions deemed reasonable. The motivational function then creates “calls to arms” and provides an impetus for participation [25,58]. 3. Methods We reconstruct the elements of the opposition frames from statements (“utterances”) of activists, collected via 39 semi-structured interviews [59] conducted between April 2017 and February 2018. Nineteen respondents live in the mining locality (in Horní Jiřetín, Litvínov or other proximate settlements) and are thus regarded as “local”. The rest live outside of the mining region, mostly in large cities (e.g., Prague and Brno) and are thus labelled as “remote”. Most respondents participated in the opposition movement outside of their profession (i.e., were not paid for their activist work). The rest consists of “professional” activists (activism was job-related), public officials, and retired members (see Appendices A and D for details on the sample). Each interview took between 45–90 minutes and consisted of open-ended questions (see Appendix B). The interviewing team consisted of two to three interviewers per interview. All three interviewers are co-authors of this paper, with the second author participating in all 39 interviews. In cases of ambiguity, interviewers asked clarifying follow-up questions. The respondents were selected by non-random sampling based on the snowball technique. This choice was warranted by the partially “hidden” population [60] and the ongoing nature of the conflict and offered the only way to gain access to less visible members. Moreover, through non-random sampling, we managed to access the core of the movement. Initial (seed) respondents were chosen first, based on their public statements in national press articles on the topic published between 1996 and 2016. The list was validated and extended during two consultations with experts knowledgeable in the field from Czech Greenpeace and from Masaryk University. Starting with the seed interviewees, each respondent could nominate up to seven other contacts with whom she had long-term cooperation ties or exchanged information on a periodic basis [61]. These two lists could entirely overlap or differ. The team then approached the suggested contacts and the process was repeated until at least a few new and achievable contacts appeared (see Appendix C). The ongoing nature of the conflict poses a substantial challenge to data collection. No recording was allowed during the interviews. The responses were thus captured through field notes. Only utterances particularly stressed by respondents were captured as direct quotations. Hence, more rigorous approaches to frame reconstruction through coding [62] were not viable. The frames were reconstructed from field notes from all interviews instead. The first step was a thorough and repeated reading of the notes and quotations, relying on the interpretive capabilities of the research team. Secondly, utterances in the notes were assigned the framing functions discussed in the theoretical chapter. These functional groups of statements provided a basis for the reconstruction of frames [63]. After that, the frames were discussed and refined within the research team. Original notes were reexamined to validate the constructed frames. Such a qualitative interpretive approach is common in frame analysis [comp. 64,65]. It is important to note, however, that it is not entirely possible to limit the subjectivity introduced by the researchers [62,63].

Brown coal-powered industrialization wrought large-scale environmental damage in Northern Bohemia. Movements responding to this situation emerged in the late 1980s [66,67] and, after the 1989 revolution, provoked the introduction of the so-called territorial ecological limits on mining [66,68] with the intention of halting damage to settlements and the local environment and spurring an early coal phase-out. Nearly 30 years later, the country is still heavily reliant on coal, which accounts for 39% of gross electricity production and 42% of the heat produced in central heating systems [69,70]. The limits currently restrict five mining sites in the Northern Bohemian Basin and Sokolov Basin, blocking approximately 900 million metric tons of coal [71]. Only two sites (the Czechoslovak Army mine [ČSA] and the Bílina mine) in the Northern Bohemian Basin offer the possibility to significantly expand mining activities (see Fig. 1).

ČSA is the first to have begun to encroach on the limits’ boundaries, and it is the primary site of conflict. At the current extraction rate, coal from ČSA is expected to last until 2024 [72]. Rescindment of the limits there would result in the destruction of the town Horní Jiřetín and its part Černice (together 2200 inhabitants), extend the edge of the pit to the city of Litvínov (24,000 inhabitants), and prolong mining operations well into 22nd century [73]. Extension of the Bílina mine is less controversial and would come close to the village Mariánske Radčice (see Fig. 1), extending its lifetime by 2055 [71].

Several factors continue to aggravate the conflict. The legal form of a governmental decree means the limits do not have any legally binding status and may simply be repealed by the sitting government [75]. Reserves proven to be located beyond the limits have not been legally designated as inaccessible and are still considered minable [75]. The State Energy Policy (SEP), a strategic document governing the development of the energy sector, envisages only a gradual coal phase-out but lacks any concrete steps [76]. Meanwhile, new investments in coal-fired power plants (e.g., 600 MW supercritical coal-fired unit commissioned at the edge of Bílina mine in 2015) adds more pressure to maintain the domestic coal mining sector [71]. The unextracted coal is owned by the state regardless of the owner of the land above it. Thus, it is the state who decides whether to favor extraction or protect the interests of the owners of the land above and around the reserves. Mining companies go to great lengths to keep their business unaffected because they own both mines and power plants and earn large surpluses on electricity trading and export [77]. Lastly, public opinion provides no firm guidance to policymakers. A recent nation-wide poll [78] is telling. Mining beyond the limits is opposed by 46% and favored by 27% of respondents. Concurrently, 45% of respondents agree with modernization and operation of the existing coal-fired power plants for as long as possible (while 37% disagree). Respondents who consider themselves “interested in energy policy” are even more favorable toward coal utilization.

The first clashes of the conflict occurred between 1992 and 1994 when environmental movements unsuccessfully blocked the demolition of the village of Libkovice in immediate proximity of the Bílina mine, which nevertheless became unnecessary and was avoided after the limits were introduced [79]. The conflict was largely dormant during the rest of the 1990s [6]. The 2004 SEP update included a requirement for “rational reassessment of brown coal mining limits” [80] and thus marked the start of the escalation. The opposition in Horní Jiřetín and Litvínov formed in response, and local referenda in 2005 and 2006 showed strong rejection of mining expansion. Environmental NGOs, mainly Greenpeace and Hnutí Duha (the Czech branch of Friends of the Earth), joined the local movement [6]. Parties opposing mining have been winning municipal elections in Litvínov and Horní Jiřetín since 2006. Litvínov-based NGO Kořeny (“Grassroots”) emerged in 2007 [81]. Since then, there have been several failed attempts to rescind the limits (e.g., in 2009 or 2011), mostly through proposed updates of the SEP [82,83]. Upon becoming a Member of the Chamber of Deputies in 2010, the Litvínov mayor secured the repeal of a provision allowing eminent-domain property expropriation on behalf of mining interests in 2012 [6], a key success for the opposition.

The conflict culminated in the period of 2014–2015. In 2014, the newly formed government signaled that it was considering to rescind the limits. A new grassroots movement, Limity jsme my (“Limits are us!”), emerged in response in 2015 and joined the existing opposition. In the end, the government decided on 29 October 2015 to rescind the limits on Bílina but keep the limits at ČSA. Horní Jiřetín was thus spared [73], and activities at the ČSA mine have been gradually declining since then. This seems to be the new status quo, as politicians in power have not been keen to reopen the question since 2015, making the potential unearthing of new coal seams at ČSA progressively costlier.

The question of mining limits once again became a topic of debate when Limity jsme my announced the first Czech “Climate Camp” on the outskirts of the ČSA mine at the beginning of 2017. The movement was promptly listed as an extremist organization by the Czech Ministry of Interior [84]. To the considerable distaste of mining proponents, participants occupied the Bílina mine in direct action against the coal infrastructure in 2017 and again in 2018 [85].

We refer the reader to [73,86] for a more detailed overview of the recent development.
In this section, we present the reconstructed frames through which the issue of coal mining is understood by the scrutinized actors, presenting the diagnostic, prognostic, and motivational functions of each frame.
The Local Impact frame is built around the perception that local citizens are burdened with numerous negative effects of open-pit mining – a fact they think is ignored by the general population and politicians. At the same time, people at the local level have no formal powers to significantly alter their situation.
The issues identified by proponents of this frame are multiple and diverse. First, local impacts constitute a set of important problems for representants of this frame. The drawbacks of coal mining, such as degradation of the countryside, emissions of harmful pollutants, dust, and noise, are obvious. The issue of public health in the locality is accentuated. Emissions from power plants and industrial sites located at the edges of pits are identified as the source of a multitude of health risks. “Politicians keep saying that we are a traditionally industrial country, yet nobody cares about the citizens’ health” (r056). Technical measures promised by mining companies to ameliorate such impacts are rarely carried out and are seen as insufficient.

Damage to the landscape and locality is also seen as a significant problem affecting living conditions. “The Czech public does not see the destruction and damage wrought by mining companies. I was accompanying delegations, and they thought I was exaggerating [when describing the situation]. When they saw the damage, they were stunned, and some even apologized to me” (r030). “We tend to forget one fact – these pits are extremely ugly” (r048).

Second, the lack of power over the issue at the municipal level is the reason why mining is allowed to continue regardless of the interests of local people. “The decision to demolish the village of Libkovice in 1992 was a wake-up call. This was the first situation when it became apparent that the voice of the local people was not being taken into consideration.” Citizens see themselves as facing the combined forces of the state apparatus and mining companies, with the Czech governance structure providing them with very few tools to defend their interests. “We are facing skepticism, actually. This ‘they-will-decide-in-Prague-anyway’ approach is everywhere” (r077). “In the face of companies’ interests and national interests, a human being has no value. Economic or so-called ‘strategic’ interests always win” (r058). In addition to this lack of formal power, national politicians have shown little respect for local representatives and their point of view. “When our mayor went to Prague to meet with the members of the government, they were arrogant and did not even listen to him” (r050). The Minister of Industry and Trade, for example, failed to visit Litvínov when touring the region in 2015. “He did not even bother to stop by… That’s how he respects local people” (r056).

With little power at hand, representatives of this frame pity the corrosive impact companies have on the state’s ability to protect the interests of local society. They use the example of Czech mining royalties, which are among the lowest in the EU, resulting in massive corporate earnings at the expense of national and municipal budgets. “The unwillingness to raise royalties is apparent” (r071). In this context, the unemployment narrative pushed by companies and echoed by the government is also questioned. “They [the authorities] allowed a shutdown of the textile industry in this region. Thousands of employees were let go, without protests from labor unions, or anybody else. And now, they make a fuss about 300 miners” (r057).

Last, the mining companies have little impetus to invest in a symbiotic partnership with municipalities, thereby furthering the disenchantment. Wealth extracted from the region seems to go only to the accounts of the companies’ moneyed owners. “The budget of the city of Litvínov gets very little from the mining company” (r056). In addition, representatives of this frame portray companies as dishonest and refer to a long history of misbehavior. “They used very aggressive rhetoric, but fortunately the local community didn’t take the bait. People felt that blackmailing was unacceptable” (r053).

5.1.2. The prognostic function
The plan to deal with the situation is primarily connected to preserving the 2015 arrangement, keeping limits at ČSA in place and concluding mining there. Preservation of this status quo should be done primarily by the state, which should consider first and foremost the wishes of local inhabitants. “The government needs to overcome the pressure of mining companies and offer a specific blueprint for alternative development of the region” (r077). In addition, the solution should become irrevocable through a permanent designation of the inaccessibility of the coal reserves under Horní Jiřetín and Litvínov. Any attempts by the companies to undermine the arrangement should be resisted.

The life in towns should return to normalcy, and the community should be allowed to prosper. To achieve that, local magazines have been issued, and cultural events are organized in both cities. “We opened this local information center here, so visitors can come and learn about the history of the city” (r067). “It is really important that the local theater started to operate here” (r044). The symbol of the revival is the castle Jezeří, which stands right above the Czechoslovak Army mine and near Horní Jiřetín. Once seriously dilapidated, it is being saved through the determined efforts of local people. “Now we have thousands of visitors yearly … The mining company did not give us a single crown to renovate the castle” (r065).

Courageous leadership from local politicians is seen as key in preserving the status quo. “This was missing in the case of Libkovice. The people were not active” (r071). The interviewees identified continued cooperation with national environmental NGOs as an essential component as well. “If it hadn’t been for them, Jiřetín wouldn’t exist anymore” (r045). “They have the infrastructure, they have lawyers, and this helps. They are an important ally in the fight against the state apparatus” (r047).
With the preservation of the status quo being the preferred outcome, supporters of this frame prefer to keep a low profile and not stir up the issue. Instead of active opposition to mining, this frame urges people to participate in activities that build stronger community ties at the local level. “We want Horní Jiřetín to become a positive example” (r052). “We need to build community at a very basic level… solidarity among neighbors” (r058).

If the rescindment of limits happens to be discussed again by politicians, then mobilization and vigorous counteractions would be needed. However, to reiterate, since the current inactivity of the state is seen as a virtue, active opposition is deemed useful only when external pressure from the state or companies arises. “It does not make sense to open the issue when there is no external pressure” (r046).

Consistent rejection of any proposals from the companies and an unwillingness to compromise, given the history of their arguably dishonest behavior, is the last part of the motivational function and the opposition’s steadfast position. “The only moment I would accept money from the company would be a result of a court settlement” (r065).

5.2. The Low-Carbon Transition frame
This frame emphasizes both local and global environmental impacts of the coal findustry, calling for a more mindful approach to nature through a less harmful form of energy production. Achieving a transition towards low-carbon energy production is seen as a desirable option.

5.2.1. The diagnostic function
This frame starts by acknowledging the legacy of coal utilization in communist times. “The forests around here were completely destroyed due to the emissions” (r061). “Back then, when there were inversions, the fog used to be yellow due to the sulfur emissions” (r057). The 1990s desulfurization of coal-fired power plants improved the situation, but the air quality continues to be compromised by high levels of nitrous oxides, particulate matter, and other pollutants. Furthermore, a large share of CO2 emissions come from coal combustion, which is inevitably linked to domestic coal mining.

This frame incorporates two main coal-related environmental issues. First is the destruction of the natural habitat in mining areas, caused both by mining and by associated industry. “Reclamation brings in monocultures; the area is essentially dead. It can’t be inhabited for centuries” (r058). “The lake in place of the old city of Most was supposed to become a residential area. Now, it’s said to contain some toxic chemicals due to leakage from a chemical plant” (r058).

Coal-related production of greenhouse gases and their contribution to climate change is the second issue. “If you look at per-capita emissions of CO2, the production in the Czech Republic is really large” (r063). “We are using power plants with an efficiency lower than 30%” (r063). It is symptomatic of the countries of the former Soviet Bloc that the climate change issue is marginalized in society and is considered far behind problems of local pollution. “The limits were rescinded in 2015. This was very symbolic, as it happened just a month ahead of the negotiation of the Paris climate treaty … Ecology is not an interesting topic for public discourse and the media. Unless there is a drought or a flood, global warming is not perceived as a topic which affects us” (r071).
This frame is strong in its prognostic function. In general, it suggests that coal is an obsolete fuel and should be replaced through systematic decarbonization of the energy industry.

Mining itself needs to be shut down quickly as other energy alternatives become more reliable and competitive. “Burning is the worst of all possible uses of coal” (r048). The use of clean coal technologies is not considered a viable option. “Desulfurization in the 1990s was not a real solution. It was a papering over and postponement of the real solution – the phase-out of coal power plants” (r071). To end mining, proper incentives and stronger regulation from the state are also essential. “As long as coal remains so cheap, the issue will still continue. It is necessary to account for externalities and set a more realistic price on coal. The limits need to be transformed into law. Unless that happens, 750 megatons of coal are just way too lucrative for the mining company. One city and one town simply cannot fend off such temptation” (r071).

Along with the introduction of fuel alternatives, the excessive consumption of energy should be curbed as well, since it directly stimulates extraction of coal. “It is not only about mining… [but] also about fighting the decisions to extend the lifetimes of dirty power plants, or their sale into the hands of mining companies, who are only interested in profit” (r074). “We are burning coal to export electricity. If we stopped exporting, we could shut down the dirtiest power plants” (r064). Savings should also be achieved in heat production. “The solution lies in energy efficiency and energy savings” (r071).

5.2.3. The motivational function
This frame calls for sustained participation in campaigns on environmental awareness. This means addressing both the national and individual levels, i.e. changing the overall energy system as well as the way individuals use energy. The goal is to produce less CO2 and thus mitigate the effects of ongoing climate change.

The tool of choice to further the opposition agenda in this frame is educational campaigns and raising awareness about the impact of coal consumption. Such campaigns are preferably led by environmental NGOs, with all their expertise and resources, high professionalism, thoroughly-supported arguments, and well-planned events, which create widespread appeal.

The use of radical action, usually ascribed to environmental NGOs, should be restrained and only used as a last resort. “Back in 2009, there was a rumor that the government was to decide to lift the limits the next day. The decision was taken to climb the roof of the building of the Government [to place a warning banner there]” (r071). Sometimes these radical actions are even considered counterproductive, tainting the public image of the coal opposition. “At that time, we were afraid that the [organization] would be too radical and would actually do more harm than good to the cause” (r044).
In this frame, coal production and consumption and the subsequent damage to the environment are merely symptoms of an inherent flaw in the current system of economic production embedded in the neoliberal approach. This approach dictates uninterrupted growth as the primary societal goal, with increasing consumption of Earth’s limited resources as a justifiable necessity. Focusing only on the mining limits, therefore, misses the real problem – the unjust system itself. “We lost our connection with the soil, with nature ... We are simply overwhelmed by consumerism.… We tend to focus solely on ‘growth’” (r065).

The other part of the frame emphasizes the inherent value of nature regardless of its practical utility for society. We, as humankind, have no right to own and consume the environment, being only one of the many (equal) species sharing the same planet, without special rights. Since anthropocentrism inevitably leads to the devastation of Earth with catastrophic impacts on all living organisms, it needs to be replaced by eco-centric approaches. “Look, this planet is going to cook itself. We need to do something about it now” (r002).

The idea of “sustainable development,” promoted in recent decades to mitigate the environmental impact of the growth-oriented economy, is largely a dodge by those benefiting from the present distribution of power in society. The energy transition towards a low-carbon energy system does not address injustice but, to the contrary, perpetuates it.

This frame is geared against any actor using coal as a commodity, thereby contributing to this injustice. Thus, no difference between state or private owners of mining companies is acknowledged; both are classified as part of the “corrupt establishment.” “We are exporting our soil in the form of electricity. And what for? For somebody’s profit.… It is a private interest, not the interest of the people” (r065).

The damage to the environment is only one of the flaws of the system along with social injustice and unfair access among the marginalized to resources, housing, and education. Embracing environmental consciousness and shutting down the excavators thus go hand in hand with focusing on other issues. “Environmental degradation and poverty in the coalmining region are just two sides of the same coin. It is the system that caused this” (r073).
The prognostic function of this frame is not extensively developed. However, actions should not lead to mainstreaming of the opposition by the system. “We don’t want to provide the expert information or do lobbying. We don’t want to be co-opted by the system. We intend to act directly, through strictly non-violent acts of civil disobedience” (r002). Direct action is not the last resort; to the contrary, it is understood as a primary tool in the repertoire of action. Private property is attacked to disrupt the system and bring attention of general public. The action is imagined in such a way that the repressive forces of the state are obliged to preserve the private property of coal companies – the sources of emissions causing climate change. This way, the state is acting formally right but morally wrong. Individuals in the movement commit legal offences in order to acquire attention and create the momentum for an early coal phase-out.

The only overarching agreement in this frame seems to concern the necessity of an immediate halt to mining activities, dictated by the already-incurred damage to the global environment. However, “to curb coal consumption is not a goal in itself. This is just the first step which needs to be achieved” (r002).

5.3.3. The motivational function
The goal of this frame is to achieve climate justice. The motivation to join groups and movements who represent this thinking is based on suspicions that the state and the system which it embraces are essentially broken. “Development should serve all the people, not just chosen groups” (r065). There is a strong moralistic appeal within this frame. The fight for the cause is perceived as worthwhile, regardless of any repression from the system. “They attack and label activists as ‘eco-terrorists.’ Protection of climate is not ‘eco-terrorism’; this is rational behavior” (r065).

Moreover, this frame appeals to participation through radical inclusiveness and openness to any input. It communicates the premise that no ideas or courses of action are rejected without discussion. “The whole movement is based on a non-hierarchical and egalitarian internal organization” (r002). “All courses of action are the result of communication within the movement, where everyone is equal to everyone else” (r032). This is particularly visible in various attempts to include people from the mining locations within the wider climate movement. “A lot of energy was invested to build links with local people and organizations to avoid the idea that ‘spoiled city kids’ who don’t really understand the problem are coming there” (r032).Our research objective was to reconstruct how coal mining is framed from the perspective of its opponents. First, we asked what framing patterns were used by the opposition in relation to coal mining. Second, we asked what were the main discursive cleavages within the opposition.

In the Local Impact frame, a variety of overlapping issues form the negative attitude towards coal mining. The frame accentuates the value of the community and the surrounding environment as the most prominent factors. In line with Devine-Wright’s concept of place attachment [23], the opponents’ positive emotional bond to the locality and their desire to preserve human settlements significantly outweigh their interest in upholding the national economy or (energy) security. Considerations about real estate prices, compensation for the destruction of homes, and other rational NIMBY factors play only a minor role in their protest. The frame further unfolds into a conflict between the genuine and solidaristic local community and an alliance of a distant establishment and unscrupulous mining companies. Usher [42] has shown a similar narrative where “irresponsible intruders will defile the community” while the community members perceive themselves as custodians of the countryside who should resist through “legitimate and proper protest.” The unfair distribution of costs and benefits [comp. 87] is partially echoed in this frame, but only as one of many issues and it does not stand out among the other reasons.

The determination to resist is further cemented by shared distrust of the state, including doubts regarding its ability to defend citizens in the face of industry interests. This situation structurally invalidates any communication between local communities and the state – a phenomenon well-documented in a number of other European countries [40,88,89]. This is consistent with a broader trend labelled as a “crisis of governance” or a “crisis of representation,” which occasionally incentivizes extra-institutional forms of political participation [comp. 90]. As shown by Bustos et al. [91], status quo consensus on the privileged position of economic and mining interests effectively excludes any non-compatible values [92]. Given this, building a coalition with environmental NGOs and other movements [41,42] is a good tactic to counter the developments threatening the community’s place-related identity [20]. Moreover, this trend stands out in the post-communist context, where the institutions of local democracy are still being negotiated and adopted.

The Low-Carbon Transition frame is explicitly based on an Environmental Modernism discourse that assumes that complex environmental challenges, including climate change, can be recognized and internalized within the existing sociopolitical system [47,93]. Unlike in the previous frame, the conflict lies between status-quo actors with vested interests and a progressive coalition promoting an energy transition to a decarbonized economy. To achieve this transition, an orchestrated gradual coal phase-out is needed. Opposition to rescinding the limits is seen as an important part of this political struggle. Effort is required on two fronts – at the local level, providing legitimacy to the movement, and at the (inter)national level, through policy processes and public debate [comp. 94]. Direct action is considered a last-resort option, potentially disruptive to the cohesion of the broader progressive coalition.

This frame emphasizes another emblematic issue shared across the majority of post-communist societies – a significantly distinct perception of local environmental issues versus global climate change issues [95]. While the former is accepted across all actors, with different strategies suggested to tackle externalities, the latter is usually neglected. In our case, even the local citizens fail to emphasize the relationship between coal production and greenhouse gas emissions. Instead, their attention is focused on environmental degradation and resulting impacts at the local level. The visibility of the climate change issue in the coal-limits debate is only due to the involvement of environmental NGOs, with their broader scope of focus.

Since 1990, a substantial part of the environmental sector has been professionalized and transformed from inclusive activist movements to professional hierarchical organizations focusing on lobbying and long-term campaigns [66,96]. This shift has also created a space for the proponents of the Anti-Systemic Environmental frame. This frame is explicitly ideological, being both anti-capitalist as well as ecologically and climate-centered [97]. In contrast to the Low-Carbon Transition frame, the necessary change is not seen as a gradual, negotiated process within the system but as its more radical transformation or its replacement. This is consistent with a Green Radicalism discourse [42,48], where conflict is seen as an inherent symptom of the current sociopolitical order. The coalmining opposition is understood as part of a larger struggle – part of a global awakening that climate change is a threat to the entire biosphere, including humankind. The emerging partnership among radical environmental movements, marginalized groups (e.g., local communities), and other involved actors then constitutes a basis for deliberation and action to ignite larger changes [comp. 98]. As a result of the mechanism of diffusion [94], direct action and civil disobedience have been adopted as primary tools in the collective action repertoire [67,99], similar to the German Ende Gelände or Dutch Code Rood initiatives, to name just two. Transnational networks have been further used for protest and direct action mobilization during the aforementioned “Climate Camps” organized by Limity jsme my [100].

Regarding the first research question, the results show that the opposition is, at least at the discursive level, driven by distinct complex narratives that stem from actors’ deeper ideological orientations [21,42,101]. This especially applies to the second and third frames, which are intentionally constructed on ideological foundations, enabling activists to go beyond the “language of struggle” by outlining strategies for change [102]. Hence, frames function as simplified vehicles for the transmission of political ideas in a particular context [103]. Notions of economic utility or the priority of cost–benefit calculations as emphasized by the NIMBY framework are barely present.

Regarding the second research question, the results point to several discursive cleavages within the opposition to coal mining. Content-wise, the most notable difference is in the varying degree of concern about the impacts of climate change. While the issue is barely recognized in the first frame, it is a central theme in the other two. A similar cleavage applies to evaluations of the breadth and complexity of the coal mining issue. While it is seen as an isolated problem in the first frame, it serves as a manifestation of a larger problem in the other two. The Low-Carbon Transition frame identifies the larger problem of environmental degradation, which it proposes to remedy through green industrial policy [104], while the Anti-Systemic Environmental frame contends it is the system as such that is wrong. In addition to the different framings, there are marked differences in tactics. The proponents of the first frame honor standard electoral, partisan, and civic participation, especially at the municipal level. The proponents of the second frame exert external pressure at all levels of governance, including the use of lobbying, media campaigns, and harnessing of expert information. This is consistent with the concept of transactional activism that has emerged in post-communist European countries in response to weak individual-level political participation [105,106]. The proponents of the third frame rely on direct action as a way of tackling the perpetuation of mining as such. In line with the characteristics of new social movements, the focus is thus not on the political system but rather on “the control of a field of autonomy or of independence vis-à-vis the system” [107]. Nevertheless, these differences are effectively discussed and mediated within the larger movement. The individuals involved seem to bear in mind the larger cause precluding the intra-movement cleavages, compromising on their internal differences in favor of the common goal, as proven also in the case of Australia [43]. As Brown and Spiegel [5] argue, such “translocal solidarities across social movements disrupt processes and practices that facilitate extraction” and enable alignment of the local frames with an overarching idea of environmental justice. Such extension of the field of struggle broadens the paths of resistance and thus “politicize[s] the unpoliticized” [91].

If at least some de-escalation of the situation is to be achieved, three substantive issues need to be addressed: the local impact of mining, the carbon emissions associated with its use, and the perceived lack of alternatives to coal in the production of electricity and especially heat. While substantial progress in these matters is generally very difficult to achieve, the situation could only benefit from a more credible acknowledgment of the living conditions near the mines and the severity of climate change. Also, a less stubborn preference for cheap coal supply over potentially less-harmful alternatives could create a more balanced environment for communication. More generally, the broader take-away from the presented research implies that a more balanced and mindful approach on the part of central institutions as well as the incorporation of the opposition into the decision-making process would be beneficial in similar situations in the future.