Greenhouse gas emissions are stagnating in Germany despite increasing deployment of renewable energy. This makes the government’s Energiewende appear inconsistent and has triggered a discussion on phasing-out coal. The focus has thus turned from niche technology development to the destabilization of the existing high-carbon regime. In this paper we investigate stakeholders’ framings and their perceptions of different policy options to advance the understanding of regime destabilization processes and theory-building in the context of the multi-level perspective (MLP) on socio-technical transitions.

We find that actors still form coalitions with traditional allies and cling to established lines of reasoning, although there are indications for a beginning disintegration of the status quo-defending coalition. In their framings, core actors emphasize risks and threats. This confirms that regime destabilization is particularly conflictual and shows that for actors pushing regime change it is more difficult to offer a positive story. Linking policies for phasing-out incumbent technologies to accompanying measures for managing structural change in affected regions may facilitate compromise. The results moreover point to a tension between national and supra-national action as a core issue in destabilization debates. Our insights are relevant for countries in similar transition phases and may inform future comparative research.
Germany’s Energiewende (energy transition) has come a long way. Within a quarter of a century, the share of renewable energy in electricity consumption has increased from around 3% in 1990 to over 30% in 2015 [1]. The introduction of support policies for renewables – at a time when this was not regarded as a serious challenge by the conventional industry [2] – built constituencies that promoted further progress [3]. Renewable energy companies became relevant players with considerable lobbying power [4], and German federal states were motivated to pursue ambitious plans for renewables development with the expectation of local co-benefits such as jobs and tax revenues [5]. Policies introduced during historic windows of opportunity thus created self-reinforcing effects, which in conjunction with external events enabled major policy and energy system changes (e.g. [[6], [7], [2]]).

In parallel, the discourses on the future of the energy supply in Germany, which initially were deeply polarized, converged over time. The “story of rise” [8] told by energy transition proponents, which promised not only the solution to environmental problems but also a modernization of the industrial system, job creation, and an enhanced position on world markets for renewable technologies, became the mainstream narrative motivating energy transition [107]. Today, none of the established parties of the political system or the major stakeholders involved publicly questions the project,1 and the transition to an energy system based mainly on renewable energy is an official government strategy [9].

The German energy transition has served as an example to advance theories of socio-technical transitions (e.g. [[10], [11]]). A widespread expectation is that Germany’s energy system is on a “substitution pathway”, where renewable technologies, initially developed in niches protected from market pressures, become competitive and eventually replace the incumbent technologies fueled by nuclear and fossil resources [[10], [12]]. Indeed, nuclear power is to be phased out by 2022, conventional power plant operators have experienced decreases in profitability due in part to the expansion of renewable energy [[13], [14]], and the resilience of the fossil-nuclear system overall appears to be declining [15].

However, the replacement of fossil by renewable technologies cannot be taken for granted. While renewable technologies have gained momentum, it is unclear whether current dynamics will lead to substitution and thus to a completion of the energy transition process. The use of coal for electricity production has decreased only slowly in recent years, and carbon dioxide emissions from electricity production even increased between 2011 and 2013 [16]. This “coal conundrum” [17] constitutes a major inconsistency within Germany’s energy transition endeavor.

This situation has given rise to an intense debate on the future of coal, which reflects the growing perception that empowering renewable technologies may not suffice, and that existing high-carbon infrastructures will need to be actively removed (see Section 2.2). This represents a new phase in the German energy transition process. The literature on sustainability transitions, traditionally focusing on the role of niche innovations in triggering systemic changes, increasingly acknowledges the relevance of this “flipside of energy transitions” [18] which requires the weakening or phasing out of existing systems [11]. However, the specific characteristics of this phase of transitions are less well understood.

In this paper we analyze the German coal phase-out debate as a case study for a socio-technical transition that has left behind the initial phase of niche technology development and is now faced with the challenge of destabilization and replacement of the incumbent regime. Our research contributes to understanding destabilization processes by addressing three research questions. 1) What discourses on German energy transition have emerged after the focus shifted from the expansion of renewable energies toward the phasing-out of incumbent technologies? 2) What strategies do actors pursue in their discursive positioning in this phase of transition? And 3) what can we infer from our analysis on promising ways forward?

To this end we analyze how actors frame problems and possible solutions, and we map actors with respect to their position in the debate. By comparing our results to previous analyses of the German energy transition discourse we aim to identify specific characteristics of framings and actor strategies in destabilization debates. To address the third question, we characterize the solution space as seen by opponent actor groups in the future-of-coal debate and identify areas with a high potential for compromise.

Our case study analysis is of relevance also for a comparison with other countries where measures to reduce or phase-out coal from energy supply are being discussed or implemented. For instance, the UK government aims to close all unabated coal power stations by 2025 at the latest. A stakeholder consultation process on options to achieve this took place in 2016 and 2017 [[19], [20]]. In Australia, where coal-fired power generation currently still accounts for more than three quarters of electricity supply, plans for energy transition and mechanisms for the retirement of coal-fired power stations are being discussed [[21], [22]]. Also, the Chinese government is making efforts to reduce coal use and to push for cleaner energy [23]. While a comparison with the processes in other countries is beyond the scope of this paper, we hope that our case study can inform future comparative research.

The following section presents the theoretical framework (2.1), background on the case study and a summary of the debate during the period under investigation (2.2), and the methodological approach and empirical material upon which the research is based (2.3). The results are presented and discussed in Section 3. Section 4 provides a summary of the main conclusions.

2. Research design
2.1. Theoretical framework
Our research framework conceptualizes the more recent history of German energy policy as a socio-technical transition, building on the multi-level perspective (MLP) and related work.2 We draw on the discourse and framing literature for the empirical analysis.

The MLP explains sustainability transitions at the level of socio-technical regimes as driven by influences from two other levels: niche innovations and an overarching socio-technical landscape [[24], [25], [26]]. The socio-technical regime is formed by the dominant technologies, the institutions, the infrastructures and practices surrounding their use, and by the associated actor groups with shared perceptions and norms. A number of processes work to stabilize the existing regime and to put innovations at a disadvantage, which may lead to a lock-in of unsustainable technologies [[27], [28]].

Niches are located below the regime level. They provide a protected space where innovations can be developed and nurtured by small actor networks, possibly to become competitive with established technologies ([27], p. 1025). Niche-innovations can break through and contribute to a regime shift if support comes from the sociotechnical landscape, which is “an exogenous environment beyond the direct influence of niche and regime actors” ([26], p. 400). Changing societal values or political coalitions represent developments at the landscape level that influence the chances of niche technologies. Climate change and the discourses that mediate its perception in society [29] are also landscape-level processes, because they pressure the energy sectors and trigger policy changes. Investigating a national case study, we explicitly consider conditions, regulations and processes at higher political levels (European, global) to be landscape factors. If a regime transition happens as a result of the interplay between the three MLP levels, the new regime configuration may also cause changes at landscape level [24].

The MLP literature traditionally focuses on processes surrounding the development of niche innovations and conditions that support their breaking through at the regime level. While MLP scholarship increasingly acknowledges the relevance of phasing out existing systems to accelerate “transitions by creating space for niche innovations and removing barriers to their diffusion” ([11], p. 1243), the MLP model itself does not provide detailed explanations of the processes that follow the entry of new technologies into the system, when the new technologies can no longer be classified as niches and are seriously challenging – but have not replaced – the existing regime ([11], p. 1244).

Research on regime destabilization however provides insights into the dynamics of this phase of transitions. It has been shown that policy mixes for sustainability transitions do include policies for regime destabilization, although the full range of options – e.g. pricing instruments, cutting subsidies for fossil energies, changing of regime rules and changes in social networks – is hardly fully exploited [30]. It is obvious that the destabilization of the old regime is likely to meet severe resistance from established actors [[31], [32]]. However, it is important to note that destabilization of the regime is not equivalent to “overthrowing” or suppressing incumbent actors. Incumbents may themselves contribute to innovations and become part of the new regime, and the notion that new entrants enter a regime and disrupt established industries may be overly simplistic [33]. The commitment of incumbent industry actors to the existing regime has been shown to weaken as external pressures accumulate and their performance problems aggravate ([34], p. 1753). However, Turnheim and Geels also point out that mindsets and perceptions of mission and identity may exhibit a high degree of lock-in, slowing down responses to external pressures.

Sustainability transitions require the contributions of multiple actors, and politics play a core role [109] which warrants a focus on actors and discourses in the analysis of transition processes [38]. We conceptualize discursive practices both as strategic resources employed by actors and as indicators of changes in their interests and perceptions. Niche actors use framing and narrative tools to empower niche technologies [[35], [27]]. Incumbent actors use discursive in combination with other forms of power to enact resistance against low-carbon transitions [31]. A repositioning in incumbents’ discourses may indicate increasing pressures and pending regime destabilization [36]. Policy responses to external events may be influenced by the dominant narratives in a given country or regime [37].

We build on the conceptualizations advanced by Rosenbloom et al. [38] and Geels and Verhees [35], both of which combine discursive approaches with transition research, investigating how actors in transition processes create or challenge their legitimacy. We adopt their approach for our analysis to understand the specific characteristic of a debate on regime destabilization.

Rosenbloom et al. [38] conceptualize the framing struggles between actors as “multi-dimensional discursive interactions”. They specifically look at how the different actor groups respond to one another in the discourse, and how they link claims related to niche innovations to those about the regime and landscape levels. Their analysis specifically points to the social construction of landscape factors, the dynamic positioning of actors, and narrative strategies as avenues for further research (p. 1286).

Geels and Verhees provide an approach for defining and analyzing cultural legitimacy in discursive interactions surrounding transition processes, building on Suchman [39] and Johnson et al. [40]. Actors create legitimacy by making actions appear “desirable, proper or appropriate”, and by presenting them as anchored in the existing “cultural framework of beliefs, values and norms” ([35], p. 911). The function of legitimacy-creation also depends on whether a framing resonates with the addressees’ interests and real-world experiences.

We follow Geels and Verhees [35] in using a framing approach. Framing is a tool through which a writer or speaker emphasizes a certain aspect of an issue while omitting others [41]. The way issues are framed have been shown to influence the perceptions, engagement and intentions of the addressees in studies on climate change communication [[42], [43], [44]]. Framings construct meaning, present an issue in a certain (normative) light, create boundaries between “good” and “evil”, allocate blame and define victims, and may serve to justify certain action to be taken [45]. Frames are often met by counter-frames that offer alternative interpretations [46]. We consider framing struggles to revolve around specific issues, while being embedded in broader discourses that represent full ensembles “of ideas, concepts and categorizations” ([47], p. 44).

2.2. Coal use in Germany and the debate on the future of coal 2015–2016
Both hard coal and lignite have played a key role for German energy supply over decades. After World War II, energy from coal was the basis for economic development both in the Federal Republic of Germany (BRD) and in the German Democratic Republic (DDR). In Western BRD, domestic hard coal later had to be subsidized to sustain it against cheaper oil and imported coal. These subsidies for uneconomic hard coal mining were phased out only between 2007 and 2018. The introduction of nuclear power in the 1970s and 80s and the increasing use of renewable energies since the 1990s entailed further reductions in the share of coal power in energy supply over the decades. In Eastern Germany, lignite mining decreased dramatically after reunification.

Nevertheless, lignite and hard coal still provide 40 percent of the German electricity supply today [48], and the coal industry still employs around 30,000 people [[49], [50], [51]]. Lignite continues to be produced from open cast mines in three regions (Rheinisches Revier, Lausitzer Revier, Mitteldeutsches Revier), and the history of domestic hard coal mining is also still a deeply-felt part of regional cultural identities, for instance in the Ruhr area.

In consequence, considerable economic interests remain associated with the coal industry. Incumbent electricity providers in Germany were slow to adapt to energy transition and still use their lobbying power to maintain the status quo [[52], [53]]. The coal industry continues to be intertwined with regional political and economic structures, and industry associations, utilities and mining unions still exert considerable lobbying power. While the coal regions traditionally are strong supporters of pro-coal policies, resistance naturally forms in those villages that are threatened by relocation from mining activities (e.g. [54]). Anti-coal activists engage in partly violent protest, which may entail escalating conflicts with local coal workers [55].

While the transition towards a sustainable, renewables-based energy system has been the subject of debate in Germany since the 1980s, previous debates were largely focused on the phase-out of nuclear power, support schemes for renewable energy, energy efficiency, climate policies such as emissions trading, and technologies for emission reductions such as carbon capture and storage. Individual actors have called for a reduction of coal use in order to reach climate targets earlier (e.g. [56], p. 11–13), but a broader debate on the future of coal took shape only recently when it became visible that emissions from coal use remained high and the short-term climate targets would be missed. A government proposal for a financial instrument to target lignite in 2015 gave rise to a first heated controversy. A more general debate on potential dates and processes for an exit from coal took place in the context of the preparation of the national Climate Action Plan 2050 (CAP 2050) in 2015 and 2016. The debate was fueled by proactive contributions from environmental NGOs and think tanks seizing the opportunity of a political climate opening up to targeting the fossil industry directly. The following sections provide more background on the 2015–2016 debate; Fig. 1 provides a timeline summary.

After the nuclear meltdown in Fukushima in 2011, the German Federal Government accelerated the phase-out of nuclear power and combined it with national targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and increasing renewable energy shares until 2050 [57]. When it became clear that the interim goal of reducing emissions by 40 percent until 2020 would not be achieved without additional action, the Federal Government proposed in 2014 that an additional 22 million tons of carbon dioxide equivalents should be saved “with particular regard to the electricity sector” ([58], p. 34). Since the coal sector is covered by the European emissions trading scheme (EU ETS), interactions between additional national measures and the EU ETS have to be taken into account.

In March 2015 the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs (BMWi) proposed an instrument to reduce carbon dioxide emissions from power plants. The “climate contribution” (Klimabeitrag) [[60], [61]] targeted emissions of power plants beyond a certain free amount. For these emissions, plant operators were to buy additional certificates under the EU ETS at a fixed price set to increase to 18–20 Euro per ton of carbon dioxide in 2020. The certificates would have been decommissioned, which was supposed to ensure that the scheme actually induced additional emission reductions at the European level, and to avoid a mere reshuffling of emissions in space and time under the cap of the EU ETS [62]. The instrument was calibrated such that it would have reduced emissions at European level by 22 million tons as required. A number of studies supported this proposal; analyses predicted effectiveness in terms of emissions savings and non-dramatic effects on plant operators and economic indicators (e.g. [[61], [62], [63], [64], [65]]).

Affected actors such as utilities, labor unions and the governments of federal states with coal mining regions lobbied heavily against the climate contribution proposal. They commissioned studies which concluded that the proposal would in fact force operators to close plants, which would result in ETS certificates remaining on the market, emissions leaking to other European countries, and significant price increases [66]. In May 2015, mining labor union IGBCE presented an alternative proposal for a “capacity reserve for security of supply and climate action” (Kapazitätsreserve), which was backed by industry association BDI [67]. IGBCE claimed that this instrument, in combination with other measures in the heat sector, would be a cheaper way to achieve the same emission reductions. A capacity reserve is attractive for power plant operators because they receive a payment for keeping plants on hold for several years before finally shutting them down.

In July 2015 it became clear that the German government would follow the IGBCE proposal. A “lignite emergency standby reserve” (Braunkohle-Sicherheitsbereitschaft) was adopted in November 2015 and passed by parliament in June 2016. Beginning in 2016, a total of 2.7 GW of lignite power plant capacity are being gradually transferred into the reserve. These plants will no longer produce electricity, but will be kept on hold for re-activation in extreme cases for instance of long-duration weather extremes. After four years they will be shut down permanently. Plant operators receive a financial compensation equivalent to the revenues they would otherwise have achieved from the electricity market during this period. The measure is expected to save between 11 and 12.5 million tons of carbon dioxide in 2020, and to cost around 230 million euros annually for seven years [59]. The government’s decision for the lignite reserve was criticized heavily by environmental NGOs, but also by many scientific policy advisors. Experts argued that the reserve was unlikely to achieve significant emission reductions, would pay operators for a service unnecessary for security of supply, and possibly would not even accelerate structural change because plants would have been shut down soon anyway [[68], [69], [70], [71], [72]].

A more general debate on coal phase-out gained momentum in 2015 and 2016 in the context of the dialogue process that informed the Federal Government’s CAP 2050, with intense involvement of think tanks and NGOs (e.g. [[73], [74], [75], [65]]). In 2015 AGORA Energiewende published a study modelling an early retirement of lignite and coal-fired plants along the emission path necessary to achieve national targets for 2030 and 2040 [76]. In January 2016 they proposed “Eleven principles for reaching a consensus on coal” [73] and suggested a dialogue to negotiate a plan for incrementally phasing-out of coal power by 2040.

Though policies for coal reduction and phase-out were discussed intensely with stakeholders and citizens,3 such an “expiration date” was not included into the final draft of the national CAP 2050 that was adopted in November 2016 [77]. However, the plan sets targets for emission reductions for individual sectors. The need to reduce coal use is implicit in the statement that “in the long term, electricity generation must be based almost completely on renewable energies” (p. 29), and that “the climate targets can only be achieved if coal-fired power generation is reduced in a step-wise manner” (p. 30). Further debate was postponed until after the federal elections in September 2017.

2.3. Methodology and approach
We perform a qualitative text analysis ([78], pp. 179–188) on a sample of approximately 100 public documents including press releases, position papers, speeches, and online newspaper reports. The statements they contain refer primarily to specific policy proposals discussed during this period (see Fig. 1). The analysis of the sample was accompanied by an evaluation of relevant media reports.

2.3.1. Sample
We considered statements of the major political actors and stakeholders in the debate. The sample focuses on
•
actors who have an obvious stake in the debate, such as lignite plant operators or environmental NGOs;

•
actors whose positions are directly relevant for the outcome of the policy process, e.g. political parties and governments of federal states; and

•
actors representing larger groups such as business associations, and documents published jointly by several relevant organizations or individuals.


We thus attempted to achieve a balanced coverage of the different actor groups while keeping the number of documents manageable. Where actors issued several statements on the same issue, we focused on the most relevant or the most comprehensive.

An internet search for statements on the policy proposals identified key actors. Statements were then retrieved from the websites of individual institutions (e.g. power utilities, environmental NGOs, political parties and business associations). Statements covering the different phases of the debate were collected. These included the discussion centering on 1) the climate contribution in the first half of 2015; 2) the lignite reserve in the second half of 2015; 3) the AGORA Energiewende proposals; and 4) the CAP 2050 in 2016. We evaluated documents summarizing stakeholder contributions during the participation process and statements provided by actors on the near final draft of the CAP 2050 in autumn 2016. From these documents we only analyzed text referring specifically to the future of coal use in Germany. A full list of actors and of the documents included in the sample is provided in Appendix B.

Our sample covers 52 actors. For the actor mapping (Section 3.2) we group them as belonging to federal government, federal states and municipalities, political parties, green NGOs and civil society, electricity providers, trade unions, and business and industry. While we did not perform the coding exercise on the full body of literature from science and think tanks on coal phase-out, we included some research institutions and think tanks who proactively issued statements and analyses on the policy proposals as examples, in order to illustrate that actors from this group also contributed to the debate and engage in the framing struggle. A more comprehensive analysis of the role of scientific policy advice in the German energy transition debate can be found in [108].

2.3.2. Coding
In order to retrieve the relevant text passages we used the coding software MAXQDA. Coding was deductive, starting from the major arguments known or expected to be present in energy transition discourses. In the recent German energy discourse, actors advocating for an ambitious energy transition traditionally employ “stories of rise” which focus on expected benefits of policy change, while actors skeptical or opposed build on stories of decline, warning of costs and risks. Both positive and negative effects are regularly located in the three domains of environment, economy, and supply security [107]. This general structure can be found in other country case studies as well (e.g. [38]). Assuming that the coal phase-out debate follows traditional structures, we set up the coding scheme along three sets of expected antagonist arguments that link coal reduction policies to environmental, economic and supply-side effects (Table 1), and that are either change legitimizing (CL1-3) or status quo defending (SQD1-3) in character. Additional codes (CL4 and SQD4) were used to collect other relevant framings that did not fall under any of the three pre-defined groups of arguments. Table 1 indicates how often each of the codes was assigned. Each coded text passage was additionally assigned a code for the respective actor.

Table 1. Coding scheme.

Expected CL arguments		Expected SQD arguments
CL1: Proposed policies are needed to address climate change and other (environmental) problems (51 codings)	versus	SQD1: Proposed policies are not appropriate to address climate change (23 codings)
CL2: Proposed policies bring economic benefits (27 codings)	versus	SQD2: Proposed policies are economically damaging (40 codings)
CL3: Proposed policies do not endanger supply security (9 codings)	versus	SQD3: Proposed policies endanger supply security (23 codings)
CL4: Other framings (4 codings)		SQD4: Other framings (3 codings)
We also used the coding software to identify how actors positioned themselves vis-à-vis different policy options. We started with general codes that captured whether actors welcomed or rejected the proposals on a climate contribution, the coal reserve, the AGORA Energiewende proposal for coal phase-out plan, the provisions of the draft CAP, or whether they proposed or discussed other policy instruments. These codings on policy proposals often overlap with the codings that are used to capture arguments and framings (Table 1). In a second step, they were reviewed and re-grouped in order to reflect key conceptual differences between the different policy measures that were considered. We identified five broad categories of policy action: 1) National regulation (such as the climate contribution or a phase-out law); 2) national regulation based on compensation (such as the coal reserve); 3) a reform of the European Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS); 4) measures to manage structural change; and 5) a dialogue process for a consensus on coal (Section 3.3).

2.3.3. Evaluation and analysis
The coded text passages were analyzed in terms of the specific framings that were employed under each of the three broad sets of arguments (Section 3.1). In a second step codings were used to map actors (Section 3.2). Based on the record of the framings actors use and of the intensity of their engagement, actors were classified as strong or moderate “change legitimizers” or “status quo defenders”. If they could not be assigned to either group based on their statements, they were classified as “intermediate”.

We integrated information on framings, the map of actors, and actors’ positions on policy instruments to delineate the solution space inherent in the discourses of different actor groups, and to indicate the degree of disagreement or openness for compromise respectively (Section 3.3).

3. Results and discussion
This section presents the framings identified by the coding exercise (Section 3.1 and Table 2), and groups actors in relation to their use of these framings (Section 3.2, Fig. 2). The more specific positions of actors on policy options are compared in Section 3.3 (Fig. 3). For a full list of actors and documents see Appendix B; for a list of acronyms and abbreviations see Appendix A.

3.1. Framings
3.1.1. Results
Table 1 shows how often each of the codes was applied in the document sample. The large majority of coded text passages could be assigned to the expected arguments related to environmental, economic and supply side effects. More than half of all CL framings (51) focus on the environment, 27 codings relate to economic effects, and relatively few address supply security (9), while SQD framings are distributed more evenly over the three categories, with a focus on economic effects (40) and 23 codings on environmental and supply side effects respectively. Very few text passages were coded as “other framings” for both groups (4 CL, 3 SQD).
CL arguments strongly build on two framings that emphasize the environmental relevance of coal: climate change and coal kills. The climate change framing typically focuses on the high risk of national emission reduction targets being missed if no additional action is taken, a delay in national coal phase-out is also seen as “death sentence to international climate protection” [96]. Framings sometimes refer specifically to the particularly harmful climate impacts of lignite power plants. Coal kills elaborates on the negative effects of coal use on the global climate, as well as on human health at the local and regional scale (e.g. nitrous oxide and mercury emissions from coal plants) and on local landscapes where lignite is mined.

In most cases, framings of the two groups come in pairs where both sides interpret the same issue in opposing ways. However, the climate change and the coal kills framings are not met by direct counter-framings, which reflects the broad consensus in Germany on climate protection and energy transition. The most prominent challenge comes from a different angle, suggesting inappropriateness and ineffectiveness of national coal reduction policies. In the SQD perspective, the proposed coal-reduction policies constitute a “double-regulation” to the EU ETS [79], creating an additional burden to a country that is already doing enough, while they would not even further reduce overall emissions beyond the EU-wide cap. National action is perceived as “contradictory to the joint European climate policy” [80], and “without relevance for the global climate, but a catastrophe for the [affected] people and regions” [81]. This is flanked by the more general, traditional market-liberal call for technology neutral regulation, and by the claim that coal use will end anyway making additional policy neither necessary nor helpful and thus a waste of effort.

CL framings respond to this challenge by attempting to provide justification for national action additional to the EU ETS. They do so in three ways. Firstly they criticize the current workings of the EU ETS, arguing that the currently dysfunctional ETS scheme will not lead to sufficient emission reductions and that it will not incentivize technological change. As the Green Party puts it, “it must not be that an ineffective system, on top of being ineffective, forbids taking effective measures.” ([82], p. 6). Secondly, they evoke a national duty to act, and highlight the international repercussions of national action (national duty/international leadership). To be a credible voice in international negotiations and to fulfil a leadership role, “chancellor Merkel now at last must do in Berlin what she is preaching internationally” [83]. Thirdly, proponents take care to equip their proposed solutions with mechanisms designed to ensure their compatibility with the EU ETS.

The major pillar of SQD arguments is the economic impacts of coal phase-out or coal reduction policies. SQD framings frequently claim detrimental effects of coal phase-out policies on the regional and national economies (suffering regions, suffering national economy). In the 2015 debate on the “climate contribution” these framings were staged most dramatically. Opponents claimed that it would lead to a “domino effect” and to the “social blackout of entire regions”; the closure of one lignite plant would entail closure of associated mines, other plants and eventually the entire regional coal industry. Massive loss of jobs would result through indirect effects, as well as severe “structural disruptions”. Actors alluded to threatened livelihoods and “existential fears” among the regional population [[81], [84], [85]]. This is emphasized further in the injustice framing that presents the lignite industry as being over-proportionately burdened: “We now see that one wants to reach the climate targets … solely at our expense.” [86]. Damage to the national economy is evoked as a result of rising electricity prices that would endanger the competitiveness of (energy-intensive) industry.

The CL community offers several counter-framings. Many of them question the claimed negative effects, classify them as moderate or negligible, or emphasize the cost-effectiveness of the proposed policies with respect to decarbonization (minor negative effects). With a view to future decarbonization, the investment security framing emphasizes the need to create reliable conditions and to avoid “stranded investments” into fossil structures that will no longer be economical once more stringent climate policy is implemented [87]. Relatively few of them (7) explicitly build on the expectation of direct economic benefits, such as the creation of new jobs and wealth in clean and sustainable business and more generally a modernization of the national industry, and framings tend to be cautious, expecting for instance “contributions to the necessary structural change and a securing of jobs in sustainable plants.” [88]. This is in contrast to traditional energy transition discourses that build strongly upon positive effects from renewable energy expansion on jobs and industry. Actors supporting coal phase-out regularly call for managing structural change in a socially compatible way (see Section 3.3), which indicates that they acknowledge the likelihood of negative impacts for affected regions and industries.

The third set of framings debates over the consequences of the proposed policies for the security of electricity supply. SQD framings suggest that they represent a threat: “Nuclear power is gone, coal power is gone, but no one tells us how we are to fill the gaps” [89]. Also, since electricity from renewable energy capacities is not produced evenly over time, they argue that back-up from reliable coal plants is needed. A related framing integrates a general commitment to energy transition: Coal is presented as enabling transition since it will ensure supply security during the transition phase and as long as technological solutions for storage are lacking. CL counter-framings sometimes directly respond to the threat framing by providing reassurance based on the argument that even with coal phase-out there will be no shortage of supply, and that it will be beneficial to get rid of excess capacities. More often, CL framings present coal-fired power plants as an impediment for transition, claiming that they are not flexible enough to adjust to fluctuating renewable electricity production.

A few statements were coded as “other framings”. These framings for instance question the compatibility of proposed policies with EU law and highlight previous achievements (SQD), or point out that coal phase-out enhances the credibility and perceived strength of government on climate goals (CL). None of the other framings was used by more than one actor, so they are not included in Table 2.

3.1.2. Discussion
The great majority of the framings that were registered by the coding exercise correspond to the broad lines of argument that are also found in historic energy transition debates [[107], [108]]. In line with the tradition, both actor groups draw on expected effects of the proposed policies in the domains of environment, economy and supply security, with CL actors driven by environmental concerns in the first place and SQD actors focusing on economic costs and risks. Very few of the coded text passages reflect attempts to frame issues in new ways or introduce entirely new aspects. Actors thus seem to be caught in a longstanding debate with established lines of reasoning. Specific characteristics of the future-of-coal debate nevertheless become apparent in the analysis of individual framings. Three major observations are discussed in the following.

First, the focus on negative impacts in SQD framings is reinforced in the destabilization debate. SQD actors can present strong victims who are located at the regime level (coal regions, employees, industry) and who are familiar, tangible and clearly identifiable. Framings thus easily create links to and imply relevance for people’s daily lives. Members beyond the affected groups may find that the framings resonate with their real-life experiences and personal priorities, as may individuals who imagine wider economic impacts or feel empathy and solidarity for coal industry employees.

Second, SQD actors engage intensely in the discursive construction of the landscape level. Their statements do not counter the climate change framing, but use it to justify their own policy proposals, even claiming that “lignite and employees [in the lignite industry] contribute to climate protection and supply security” [90]. This is in line with the traditional consensus on climate protection targets among established stakeholders and policy actors in Germany. At the same time, the SQD ineffectiveness framing builds on a landscape issue – EU climate policy – to delegate responsibility away from the national level. By claiming that national action will not reduce emissions under the EU ETS, a challenge to the most central CL framing is thus constructed.

Third, CL framings focus on landscape level necessities but, in contrast to the traditional CL discourse, struggle to offer a positive story. CL framings emphasize climate risks and the need to protect the climate, and thus operate almost exclusively at the landscape level. Renewable technologies and surrounding actors as potential beneficiaries of the proposed policies are hardly present. The focus of CL framings on climate protection means that benefits are found at landscape level and have a less direct link to the daily lives of German citizens. In addition, CL framings are often formulated in negative terms, building on victims rather than benefits (coal kills). This suggests that CL actors follow a strategy of increasing alarm [91]. While energy transition proponents traditionally have emphasized the expectation of economic benefits, similar claims are rather cautious and unspecific in the future-of-coal debate. Beneficial effects are sometimes implicit in negative framings, for instance where coal is presented as an impediment for transition or as a threat to human health. However, these cautious claims of economic and overall wealth improvements are not in the foreground of the debate. Thus, the landscape focus of the framings makes it difficult for CL actors to tell positive stories and to create the vision of a better future.

3.2. Actor mapping
3.2.1. Results
Based on their use of the framings, actors are characterized in Fig. 2 as strong or moderate change legitimizers, strong or moderate status quo defenders, or as intermediate (non-assignable to either group).
As in earlier German debates on energy transition, the Federal Government does not have a homogenous position. However, the traditional divide between the Federal Ministry for Environment (BMUB) and the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs (BMWi) is not reproduced clearly in the future-of-coal debate. BMUB explicitly supported coal phase-out policy proposals such as the climate contribution or AGORA Energiewende’s proposal [92] and built its arguments exclusively on CL framings. The BMWi used both CL and SQD framings. Although the ministry initiated the climate contribution proposal, it later was more responsive to the interests of incumbent actors and also removed some of the more ambitious elements from the national CAP 2050 [93]. BMWi is thus classified as an intermediate actor, BMUB as a change legitimizer.

The governments of federal states that host lignite regions acted as status quo defenders, and have been influential behind the scenes [94]. Their behavior reflects particular regional conditions and interests, as well as traditional political and economic ties between state-level social democrats and the coal industry. NRW, however, did not act homogeneously, since the statement on the CAP 2050 prepared by the Green Party-led environment ministry builds on CL framings and argues for planned coal phase-out. Federal states without coal mining were not particularly active in the debate. In the consultation process on the national CAP 2050, these states tended to use CL framings in favor of coal phase-out. We classify them as moderate change legitimizers.

The conservative party group in Federal Parliament (CDU/CSU) as well as the conservatives in affected federal states shared SQD framings, thus rhetorically uniting more strongly with the influential labor unions than the social democrats (SPD) who have traditionally been the unions’ allies. Federal level social democrats, by contrast, were guarded in the debate (e.g. [95]). Both the Ministers for the Economy and for the Environment at federal level were social democrats at the time, but the SPD was also part of government coalitions in the federal states with coal mining, making the party overall an intermediate actor. Both CL and SQD framings are present in party members’ statements. The Green Party is a prominent change legitimizer, actively campaigning for coal phase-out. It used model versions of CL framings, claiming for instance that “coal kills the climate, coal destroys homelands, coal deprives us of the air to breathe” [96]. The federal Left Party also supports a planned phase-out of coal through national law.

Environmental NGOs were among the most active advocates for coal reduction and phase-out policies in the period we analyzed, and all appear as strong change legitimizers. In addition to publishing statements individually, they have joined forces with green business associations and stakeholders with a non-environmental focus such as churches, development, social and consumer organizations (e.g. [97]).

The coal industry (plant and lignite mine operators RWE, Steag, MIBRAG, Vattenfall, LEAG), the coal industry association (DEBRIV) and related labor unions (in particular IGBCE) form the core group of status-quo defenders. One of the big electricity suppliers, EnBW (located in Green Party-led Baden-Württemberg and with no lignite in its portfolio) is an exception: EnBW welcomed the climate contribution proposal [98]. Municipal utilities belong to the change legitimizers. Services union Ver.di participated in the status quo defending group regarding the climate contribution proposal. However, commissioning and publishing a study that identifies financial compensation needs in case of coal phase-out [50], they moved to a more moderate position.

Most conventional industry associations are strong status quo defenders. The BDEW (German association for energy and water industries) is classified as moderately SQD because it rejected CL policy proposals less rigorously than other industry associations. Green energy business associations such as BEE (German Renewable Energy Federation) are natural change legitimizers, but there are also major German business players who argued for a planned coal phase-out with a clear exit date, emphasizing the investment security framing (Stiftung 2 Grad).

Both change legitimizers and status quo defenders rely on support from scientists and experts. Scientific policy advisors are traditionally closely associated with actor coalitions and their discourses in the German energy debate. The actor mapping in Fig. 2 includes some scientific advisory institutions and think tanks who proactively published statements or studies related to coal phase-out, to indicate that they actively contributed to shaping the discourse. CL framings were backed by AGORA Energiewende, SRU, FÖS and DIW, while SQD framings were supported by statements and reports by EWI and IW.

3.2.2. Discussion
The debate on the future of coal in Germany is characterized by a divide between one actor group supporting change and one actor group defending the status quo, which is in line with the structure of earlier energy transition debates [[99], [100]]. Many actors group with their traditional allies and build their framing strategies on established arguments. Environmental NGOs, the Green Party and supportive think tanks are key drivers in the CL actor group, while the affected coal industry, influential business associations such as BDI, and the mining unions strongly shape the SQD discourse.

Between these core actor groups, the debate appears to be associated with a re-intensified polarization of discursive strategies. While there had been a convergence of discourses in preceding energy transition debate, with decreasing expert support for dramatic “stories of rise” or “stories of decline” [[107], [108]], the coal debate re-emphasizes conflict. This suggests that, as expected, policy measures for regime destabilization face specific challenges, as they create negative effects for influential regime-level players and are thus likely to meet particularly strong resistance.

However, while the core groups appear united behind shared discourses, a closer look at the actor map also reveals indications for beginning regime destabilization. Most importantly, the BMWi, traditionally a strong ally of SQD business and industry, has played an ambivalent role in the process and can no longer be clearly classified as an SQD actor. This is connected to the heterogeneous positioning of Social Democrats. Moreover, NRW as a traditionally influential federal state in coal-related policy processes has an intermediate position, due to the participation of the Green Party in government and possibly tensions within the Social Democratic Party. There are actors from the industry and business domain who actively support coal reduction policies, among them one of the big electricity producers (EnBW). A second big electricity producer, E.ON, is silent in the debate. Although the adoption of the coal reserve suggests that the lobbying power of SQD actors is still substantial, there are thus indications for a beginning destabilization of the traditional actor coalition associated with the defense of the existing regime.

3.3. Characterizing the solution space
3.3.1. Results
This section compares the positions of the two major antagonist groups of actors on policy solutions in the future-of-coal debate. While there is broad consensus on the goal of protecting the climate in general, German actors fundamentally disagree over what action national policy-makers should take, Based on a review of the codings on policy proposals (see Section 2.3), we grouped the policy suggestions that recurred in the debate into five broad categories of policy action (Fig. 3): 1) National regulation (such as a phase-out law); 2) a coal reserve (as example for national regulation with compensation); 3) a reform of the EU ETS, that is, Germany pursuing action at European level; 4) measures to manage structural change (as supporting action); and 5) a dialogue for a consensus on coal (as a process proposal). Fig. 3 shows the degree to which CL and SQD actors support the respective policy measures. For the creation of the figure, the codings were evaluated to identify the policy actions considered in the debate, and to assess whether the CL and SQD actor groups as identified in Fig. 2 expressed high, medium or low support for the respective measures.
Unilateral coal reduction or phase-out policies are highly contentious. CL actors promote various national regulation measures such as phasing-out coal with a fixed exit date, limits to the lifespan of coal plants and carbon dioxide emission limits, and a ban on the development of new lignite mines and on investment in new coal plants. A unilateral decommissioning of EU ETS certificates is envisioned to avoid carbon leakage as a result of national action, as well as unilateral measures to enhance the effect of the ETS such as a national carbon dioxide minimum price. SQD actors routinely and rigorously reject proposals for unilateral measures, their framings working to delegate responsibility for action to the European level instead. The divide is partly normative. In the perspective of CL actors, every individual (country) should do its duty, and Germany should strive to be a role model for others. SQD actors perceive the national efforts already undertaken as more than sufficient, and place the focus on ensuring a level playing field with other countries. Beyond ethical concerns, incumbent actors perceive their economic interest as directly threatened, which gives them a reason to strategically employ any plausible SQD framing.

However, solutions that include compensation for affected actors, such as a coal reserve, might enhance the chances for an implementation of national measures. This is illustrated by the episode on the lignite emergency standby reserve. Though being an additional national-level instrument, the reserve received a high level of support by many SQD actors and was eventually implemented. CL actors criticized it as being insufficient and highly expensive. Nevertheless, it does contribute to the central CL mission of shutting down coal power plants, which led CL actor Germanwatch to interpret it as “the beginning of the end of lignite electricity” [101]. The lignite reserve case thus indicates that coal phase-out is already acknowledged as a long-term inevitability by the affected industry representatives [102], and that they use their discursive resources in the first place to pressure for financial compensation.

Strengthening the EU ETS might also contribute to achieving national climate targets and to incentivizing structural change in individual countries [77]. In the MLP terminology, by driving EU ETS reform the German government would contribute to changes at landscape level that would in turn facilitate regime transformation. However, this policy dimension offers only slightly larger scope for consensus than proposals for national action. CL actors generally support strengthening the EU ETS to remedy its deficiencies, in particular the excess availability of certificates and low certificate prices. Options for reform include tightening the linear reduction factor determining the annual emissions cap, deleting excess certificates, and focusing carbon leakage-related exemptions on fewer sectors [103]. A minimum price might be a reform option that could serve to reconcile additional unilateral action with the EU ETS, since it would reduce the leakage of emissions to Member States with weaker national policies [110]. Despite their frequent references to the EU ETS as the central instrument for climate protection, however, many SQD actors oppose a tightening of European rules (e.g. DEBRIV, BDI, VIK, DIHK, WV Metalle). Only few SQD actors call for a strengthening of the EU ETS instead of national measures (Vattenfall, Sachsen, Ver.di, BDEW).

The proposal for socially sensitive management of structural change, that is, for supporting actors and regions likely to be negatively affected by changes in energy supply structures, has relatively high potential for compromise. CL actors regularly call for such action to accompany ambitious coal reduction policies. Measures could relate to the development of new business and (renewable energy) industry on the areas of former mines and coal plants, the provision of infrastructures for traffic, information technology, and the development of tourism. Managing structural change might also involve the direct financial compensation for coal industry employees who lose their jobs, as well as re-training or early retirement schemes [[49], [104], [50]]. SQD actors often agree in principle, although they attempt to separate structural change management discursively from coal policies, and to make action on coal phase-out contingent upon successful structural change aid. The CAP 2050 provides a starting point, envisioning regional funds to support investment [77].

Scope for compromise is also conceivable with respect to the set-up of a dialogue process discussing the future of coal. In order to avoid a society-dividing conflict as experienced over nuclear power, several actors proposed a dialogue process for a consensus on coal with broad stakeholder participation (e.g. [[73], [105], [65]]. The national CAP 2050 envisions a commission on “growth, structural change and regional development” starting its work in 2018. Although coal policies are not explicitly mentioned, they are likely to be a focus of the commission. Positions on the commission are mixed. Many CL actors (e.g. Germanwatch, SRU, Germanwatch, VKU, Stiftung 2 Grad, Green Party) and some moderate SQD actors (BDEW, DGB) support it. The commission is not recommended by several environmental NGOs (BUND, Greenpeace) and it is rejected by a number of business associations (e.g. DEBRIV, BDI, VIK, DIHK). However, the statements suggest that criticism is less targeted at the dialogue process itself, and more toward the aims it is meant to achieve. Thus, the mandate and scope of the commission’s work are likely to be controversial. Careful design and communication will be needed to convince all relevant actors to participate.

3.3.2. Discussion
The results of our case study analysis suggest that when the political debate in socio-technical transition processes turns toward phasing out existing high-carbon systems, policy-making has to account for specific conditions.

Policies supporting the destabilization of existing regimes are likely to be particularly conflictual and difficult to implement, reflecting the fact that the costs are concentrated among few powerful actors with strong lobbies, and that the benefits are unspecified or diffused across many recipients [106]. This is confirmed by our analysis, which also shows that this applies to different types of policies (regulation, bans, carbon pricing) and to measures at national or supranational level alike. SQD actors in our case study oppose unilateral measures and delegate responsibility for action to the European level, but they also tend to reject a strengthening of EU ETS rules. The feasibility of implementing such policy measures may however be enhanced through the targeted compensation of affected industries.

In order to enable the formation of new coalitions, it may be helpful to couple regime destabilization policies with activities for managing structural change in affected regions. The comparison of perspectives on the solution space in our case study indicates that scope for consensus is greatest in negotiations over structural change management, that is, accompanying measures that do not themselves target the climate or emissions problem but aim to create new, credible and attractive economic perspectives for industries and regions expected to lose from coal phase-out. Such measures may include re-training or early retirement schemes for employees, incentives for the development of industry on former mining areas, or developing tourism based on regional mining-related history or the restoration of landscapes. If structural change management successfully eased concerns about rising unemployment and other negative impacts on regional economies, influential actors such as Federal States’ governments or mining unions would have much less reason to continue resisting coal phase-out policies. The SQD group could thus lose key players, even if industry actors with strong coal-related interests remain opposed. Generally, while it may not be straightforward to tell a positive story in the context of regime destabilization, structural change management allows building a discourse upon framings that focus on overcoming problems rather than describing them.

4. Conclusions
This paper analyzes the recent German debate on the future of coal as an example of a socio-technical transition that begins to focus on the destabilization of the incumbent high-carbon regime. In an MLP perspective, it explores the framings actors use, the way they position themselves in the debate, and their perception of the solution space.

The analysis reveals a divide between two opposed actor groups as in earlier German energy transition debates, both building on established lines of reasoning. The CL actor group is led by environmental NGOs, the Green Party and supportive think tanks, the SQD by the affected coal industry, influential business associations, and the mining unions. The SQD actor group still can be assumed to dispose of considerable lobbying power. However, we also find indications for a beginning disintegration of the actor coalition associated with the defense of the existing regime, with key actors traditionally associated with the SQD group missing or adopting ambivalent roles, such as the Ministry for Economic Affairs and two of the big electricity utilities.

In an MLP perspective, the role of the environmental and civil society NGOs in our case study deserves discussion. In the future-of-coal debate, they act without direct link to the niche level. Rather, they operate from within the existing regime in an attempt to change the broader landscape-level public and political discourse on energy and environment. In our case study, this appears to be a particularly relevant mechanism, given that actors who represent the renewable technologies challenging the existing regime (formerly niche actors) do not play a central role in the debate. It also implies that values as a motivating force of actors who function as regime critiques might deserve more attention in the MLP heuristic.

The analysis of the framing strategies suggests that regime destabilization is particularly conflictual. The debate among the core actor groups appears to be associated with a re-intensified polarization, framing strategies emphasizing negative effects and dangers and risks. In contrast to earlier discourses, CL actors rarely link the proposed policies to specific benefits for instance for the renewable industry. Instead, they focus on the need to avoid negative effects from climate change (landscape level) or future costs from a lock-in of high-carbon technologies (regime-level). SQD framings, at the same time, are able to present very specific and tangible victims at risk of economic and sometimes identity-related loss. Our analysis thus suggests that when the focus turns on destabilization of existing regimes in socio-technical transition processes, change promoting actors will tend to build strongly on increasing alarm and negative framings, which may imply that they lose the power of a positive story.

In their framing strategies, both CL and SQD actor groups engage strongly in the social construction of the landscape level, each group selecting those aspects that suit their argumentative purposes. CL actors derive the justification for regime destabilization from global environmental threats such as climate change, while SQD actors use framings operating at the landscape level to delegate responsibility away from the national government. This confirms the notion of the landscape level as a “latent potential” for interpretation in discursive construction ([38], p. 1286).

Our analysis is also in line with the expectation that policies destabilizing existing regimes create concentrated costs for few powerful actors and thus meet strong resistance. This is likely to apply to different types of policy instruments, as long as they are not designed around a compensation mechanism for the affected industry. Our results moreover point to a tension between national and supra-national action as a core issue in destabilization debates, and to the need for measures that reconcile national action for instance with overarching emissions trading schemes.

A salient feature of the case study’s debate is the discursive link between policies targeting coal and the call for managing structural change in affected regions. CL actors emphasize this link, thus partly compensating for the lack of a positive story in their main argument. Such a strategy might more generally be suitable in destabilization debates for shifting the focus from describing problems to addressing them, inviting incumbents to play a constructive part in the transition process, and facilitating changes in coalition structures.

While our analysis is confined to a single-country case study, its insights might be relevant for other countries in similar situations. Further research based on a comparison of destabilization debates across different countries will be needed to validate its results and further develop our understanding of what happens in transition processes after the first breaking through of new technologies.

5. Funding source
This work was supported by Reiner Lemoine Stiftung through a PhD fellowship to Anna Leipprand, administered by Technische Universität Berlin under Project Number 10041954. The funding body did not influence decisions on study design, the collection, analysis and interpretation of data, the writing of the study, or submission for publication.