The young Republic of Kosovo sits atop the fifth largest geological lignite reserve on the planet. In the face of an unreliable electricity supply, the Government has promoted the New Kosovo Power Plant as a key project for energy security and national economic development. Efforts to add new coal-based generation capacities have sparked a debate over appropriate approaches to achieve a reliable and affordable electricity supply. Drawing on a governmentality-inspired analytics of protest, we explore how critical civil society organizations engage with and challenge the rationalities and practices that establish the New Kosovo Power Plant as a project of major national importance. We conceptualize dissent as a counter-conduct—resistance enacted in the context of ‘the conduct of conduct’. We find that critics employ different notions of energy security to promote alternative paths to governing a reliable energy system. We argue that critics simultaneously challenge and reinforce a political strategy of securitization, which constructs power plants fuelled by domestic resources as backbones of national economic development. The case helps illustrate possibilities for and constraints on enacting dissent against a project of national prestige, which are also likely to occur in comparable conflicts elsewhere.

In December 2017, the Government of Kosovo (GoK) reached an agreement with Contour Global, a company based in the United States of America (US), to develop the 450 MW lignite-based New Kosovo Power Plant (NKPP). For thirteen years, state institutions promoted plans for a new power plant in the context of post-conflict efforts to overcome an erratic and deficient electricity supply [1,2]. Energy political debates during this period were underscored by characterizations of energy security and reliability of supply as being vital for national economic development [3,4] and domestic and regional political stability [[5], [6], [7]]. The GoK and the World Bank Group (WB) argued that Kosovo's abundant lignite reserves were the only viable source that could fuel baseload electricity production and ensure an affordable and reliable electricity supply [2,7]. The Kosovo Civil Society Consortium for Sustainable Development (KOSID) challenged the focus of the GoK and its development partners on domestic lignite. Members of this consortium contested NKPP’s status as an inevitable project for energy security and economic development. KOSID has argued that a reliable and affordable electricity supply could be achieved with investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy generation, a reduction in existing technical and commercial losses of electricity and with the liberalization of the energy market [8].

The objective of this article is to explore how resistance to NKPP was enacted in relation to the political rationalities and practices that have established imperative goals of government—such as energy security and economic development—as non-negotiable [[9], [10], [11]] and the development of NKPP as inevitable. For this purpose, we apply an analytics of protest framework [9]. Inspired by critical Foucauldian governmentality literature, an analytics of protest goes beyond the power-resistance binary that is typical in actor-centric approaches to understanding contentious politics. Actor-centric approaches view enactments of resistance (by non-governmental actors) as being in direct opposition to power (held and executed by governmental actors) [9]. At first glance, the NKPP case displays clear boundaries between civil society organizations opposing NKPP from the bottom up on one side, and government agencies promoting NKPP as a development project from the top down on the other. Upon closer inspection, however, we see that both sides bolster broader security narratives in energy policy debates, as they equally appeal to collective goals of energy security and economic development to justify their positions ([12,13], see also [14]). Thus, resistance to NKPP is better conceptualized through a relational, counter-conducts perspective on contentious politics, which focuses on the practices and rationalities of dissent [9,15]. This conceptualization allows us examine diverging efforts to govern the energy system in post-conflict Kosovo as mutually constitutive [9].

The notion of energy security is central to narratives and knowledge practices that establish energy projects as being vital for collectively aspired goals of development. As a framing device, energy security can justify policy interventions that prohibit opposition from being expressed [16,17]. However, its performative character [17] also caters to subtler modes of governing dissent against energy infrastructures, which do not depend on direct authority but rather rely on the productive face of power. Bridge [17] argues that knowledge practices related to energy security can have a constitutive effect on energy policy and political relations at large, and that these practices can even bring about new forms of political capacity and agency. Such practices of securitization promote an understanding of energy political questions as matters of (national) security [17]. They can frame power plants fuelled by domestic resources as backbones of national economic development. An analytics of protest perspective prompts us to examine the ways in which dissent against energy projects engages with such political rationalities and practices of energy securitization and how it can simultaneously challenge and reinforce them [9,18].

So far, the concept of counter-conducts and the analytics of protest framework [9] have not been directly utilized in governmentality-inspired social studies of energy [16,[19], [20], [21], [22]]. In combination with a performative view of energy security [16], a counter-conducts perspective allows us to discuss implications of engaging with pre-eminent rationalities and practices around the government of energy systems, in this case, various logics of energy security [17]. In the context of the very young nation Kosovo, we want to understand the particular ways in which dissent enacted against NKPP navigates a strategy of securitization to plausibly contest the centrality of NKPP for energy security and national economic development. The post-conflict setting of our case study provides a compelling example of the pertinence of national development narratives in struggles over energy infrastructures [23].

In the next section, we outline the theoretical underpinnings of the analysis and clarify the concepts used. For our case study, we analyzed semi-structured interviews with actors involved in the public debate over the future of the energy sector in Kosovo and an extensive body of policy documents and political commentary (Section 3). Drawing on coding tactics of constructivist grounded theory [24], we analyze discourses and practices of contention [25]. We present results in Section 4 and discuss these in relation to various logics of energy security in Section 5. Section 6 concludes with a reflection on our results and on the advantages and limitations of the analytical framework applied.

2. Theoretical and analytical framework
2.1. Conceptualizing power and resistance in energy infrastructure controversies
In the first volume of The History of Sexuality, Foucault laid out a number of propositions on power, stressing its relational character. He famously stated that “[w]here there is power, there is resistance” ([26], p. 95) and that “consequently, resistance is never in a position of exteriority in relation to power” ([26], p. 95). However, he also held that we should not consider resistance as entirely captured and defeated by power. In their relationality, power and resistance coexist and are distributed irregularly and in multiple locales [26]. As there is no single source or authority of power, so there is “no single locus of great Refusal, no soul of revolt, source of all rebellions, or pure law of the revolutionary.” ([26], pp. 95–96). An important insight here is that power mechanisms ought to be analyzed in a field of ‘force relations’ and with reference to the strategies that run through them [26]. This focus on the ubiquity and relationality of power and resistance features throughout Foucault’s elaborations on governmentality [15]. The notion of governmentality itself highlights a mode of governing ‘at a distance’ [27] and an exercise of power through the regulation of conduct ([9], p. 238). Individuals are viewed as central to the operation of power [27]. Rule at a distance becomes possible as political rationalities and technologies of government shape the field of possibilities for conduct and render dissent governable [9,18]. A governmentality perspective thus presumes an interrelationship between government and dissent. A counter-conducts lens can allow for a systematic approach to consider such interrelations [9].

Counter-conducts, as Foucault chose to coin his conceptualization of ‘movements of resistance and insubordination’ ([15], p. 194) in the absence of a more adequate term ([15], pp. 200–201), imply that resistance and regimes of power reflect and shape each other ([9], p. 240). Counter-conducts thus do not denote a rejection of ‘the conduct of conduct’, but rather a refusal to be conducted towards particular ends and objectives, through particular methods or by particular actors [9]. Applied to an energy controversy, the counter-conducts concept directs the analytic interest towards the ways in which enactments of dissent relate to and are enveloped in the strategies that establish contentious energy infrastructures as vital and inevitable projects [9,26]. By adopting a performative understanding of energy security in our analysis [16,17], we conceptualize securitization as one such strategy that shapes competing efforts to promote and oppose a lignite-fired power plant. In this context, strategies of securitization denote institutionally and socially regularized effects of “the non-subjective articulation of […] individual and group tactics” ([28], pp. 87–88, in reference to Foucault, 1990), through which matters of energy come to be discussed as matters of security [17].

We employ a constructivist understanding of energy security and examine it empirically as a ‘concept definition-in-use’ [29]. We draw from Bridge’s [17] analytical elaboration of sovereign, vital systems and population logics of energy security. Lastly, we subscribe to a broader definition of governmentality as a framework to analyze power relations and acknowledge the plurality of productive uses of this notion [30,31].

2.2. Analyzing resistance to energy infrastructures as counter-conducts
The counter-conduct concept provides us with a lens to make sense of the strategic interrelations that render contested artefacts, as well as dissent itself, governable [19,32]. Such strategic interrelations can be identified in the discursive field, in which “problems, sites and forms of visibility are delineated and accorded significance” ([27], p. 273) through various modes of calculation, inscription and visualization [18,19,32].

The analytics of protest framework has been adopted by Carl Death [9] from Mitchel Dean’s [18] analytics of government. Dean proposes an analytics along the “visibilities, mentalities, technologies and agencies” that may “constitute a kind of taken-for-granted point of reference for any form of problematization” ([18], p. 37). Fields of visibility consider how certain governmental problematizations, that is, the object, the scale and the objectives of government, are delineated discursively [27], while others are obscured [9,11,18]. Such visibilities are identified as being inscribed in maps, graphs and other visual representations [9,11,18]. Here, we focus on discursive structures [33] through which particular aspects of the energy system become delineated as fields of governmental intervention [11,32]. Regimes of knowledge entail “the theories, programmes, knowledge and expertise that compose a field to be governed and invest it with purposes and objectives” ([18], p. 37). In the context of energy conflicts, we look at the forms of knowledge and types of expertise that serve to justify or refute a project’s relevance. Techniques and technologies denote a rich set of “means, mechanisms, procedures, instruments, tactics, techniques, technologies and vocabularies” that constitute authority and accomplish rule ([18], p. 42). We focus on tactics, acts, procedures, documents [34] and knowledge practices through which the energy system, its limitations and its potentials are rendered knowable, visible and thereby governable [19]. The final dimension explores the subjectivities and political identities that are elicited by promoting and attributing “various capacities, qualities and statuses to particular agents” ([18], pp. 43–44). We highlight in particular how critics attribute to and elicit from households as energy consumers specific qualities and responsibilities (see Table 1 in Section 5 for the operationalization and key findings of the analysis).

Finally, while observing how energy security has been mobilized by proponents and critics of NKPP, we find a distinction between (1) sovereign, (2) population and (3) vital systems security logics to be very helpful ([17], drawing on Lakoff, 2008). Each of these logics provides a different framing of what constitutes an (in)secure energy system, and highlights particular elements of the energy system as being critical for energy security. Following Bridge [17], a sovereign security logic emphasizes national supply in a geopolitical context and the importance of domestic energy resources and generation capacities. A population security logic highlights patterns of energy flow and consumption within the national realm. Lastly, vital systems security can highlight vulnerabilities and critical measures across several scales of organization, stressing the connectivity of energy systems and transmission and distribution networks as objects for governing a secure energy system. These logics are not mutually exclusive and may feature simultaneously in actors’ narratives at any given time [17].1

3. Methods
Our in-depth qualitative case study research follows an interpretive research methodology [36]. We selected empirical material from the period between 2003 and June 2017, starting with documents that introduced the idea of increasing lignite-based generation capacities in Kosovo. The first author conducted 11 semi-structured, in-depth interviews with 13 interview partners in Kosovo, including five members of KOSID, two members of Forum 2015, one former senior official of the Ministry for Energy and Mines, one senior official and one internal consultant of the Ministry for Economic Development,2 one member of the Renewable Energy Association of Kosovo and a citizen of Hade with two of their family members. Interviews were conducted in Albanian, in the period between 2012 and 2017. The relevance of the three older interviews was confirmed by the interviews in 2016 and 2017 with other members of the respective organizations (KOSID, Forum 2015, GoK). We supplemented the interviews by analyzing actors’ statements from a rich body of written material, including press releases, website content and newspaper interviews. Policy papers, energy strategies, spatial mining plans of the GoK, as well as white papers and project proposals of GoK’s international development partners, provided a source for discerning the rationalities and practices behind the promotion of NKPP. Assessments and reports, written or commissioned by NKPP’s critics, provided insight into how critics mobilize discursive elements and knowledge practices to challenge the project. For a systematic analysis of the empirical material, we used coding techniques of constructivist grounded theory [24]. We used MAXQDA software for coding.

A shortcoming of our study is that we can only provide an indirect account of practices of knowledge production, as we were not able to directly observe practices involved in making these evaluation reports and strategy documents. To lessen this shortcoming, we have paid attention to the context and the authorship of the documents analyzed, their temporal sequence, their interlinkages and the form in which knowledge claims are presented.

4. The ways of promoting and opposing the New Kosovo Power Plant
4.1. Case study description
The Republic of Kosovo sits atop the planet’s fifth largest geological reserves of lignite, with an estimated 12.5 billion tons [37]. Over 97% of electricity generated in the country comes from two thermal power plants, Kosovo A and Kosovo B [37]. These aging power plants3 are the primary sources of greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution in the country [38], with sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and particularly dust emissions exceeding European Union (EU) limits [39,40]. Following the NATO4 campaign in 1999, the Kosovan energy sector came under the auspices of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and Provisional Institutions of Self-Government [38]. The country was plagued by frequent blackouts and unreliable electricity supply. The government attributed the erratic supply to the degraded state of energy infrastructure resulting from neglect throughout the 1990s [1]. The 2003 Energy Strategy and Policy White Paper of UNMIK Pillar IV—an EU-led section with a focus on reconstruction and economic development—proposed that Kosovan lignite resources were crucial to satisfy the country’s urgent need for a reliable and secured electricity supply. Energy security was defined as a key policy direction in the energy sector and a precondition for the country’s development [2]. Around one billion euros had been invested in the energy sector by 2009 [1,41]. Multilateral and bilateral donors justified their financial and technical aid to the energy sector as an effort to stabilize the country politically, enable economic development and alleviate poverty [5,6,41,42].

Plans to develop a 2100 MW Kosovo C power plant and an adjacent mine in the Sibovc field featured centrally in the 2005 draft of the Energy Strategy [42]. The project went through multiple stages of reconfiguration [42]. Kosovo C was renamed to New Kosovo Power Plant (henceforth NKPP) in the Energy Strategy 2009–2018 [1]. The new strategy foresaw two development phases of 1000 MW each for NKPP and a new mining field that would supply both existing and new power plants until the end of their lifespan [1]. The GoK asked WB to provide a partial risk guarantee for private investors [5]. At around the same time, Vattenfall Europe developed a mining plan for the New Sibovc Mine [43]. Based on this plan, the government declared an area of special economic interest for future lignite mining [43].

The planned 2100 MW Kosovo C power plant had been presented to the public as a project of major national importance, as it envisioned the utilization of Kosovo’s abundant lignite reserves to cover domestic demand and to export electricity in the region.5 Forum 2015, a joint initiative of the Kosovo Foundation for Open Society and Riinvest Institute for Development Research, published a damning analysis, highlighting technical flaws and predicting that a power plant of 2100 MW capacities would have grave impacts on public health and competing economic sectors [44]. Members of Forum 2015 remained critical of NKPP, yet they argued that the development of a smaller thermal power plant of up to 500 MW installed capacities based on satisfactory planning processes would be adequate [45]. As the project began to stall and was reconfigured to lower capacities, developments in the energy sector became an object of scrutiny for multiple civil society organizations. The Kosovar Institute for Policy Research and Development, the Forum for Civic Initiatives and the Institute for Advanced Studies raised concerns over the focus of WB’s technical assistance on lignite [41,46]. They demanded that thorough evaluations of energy generation and saving options should precede any significant investment in the energy sector [41,46]. These and other civil society organizations established the Kosovo Civil Society Consortium for Sustainable Development (KOSID).6 KOSID7 held that the country did not need new lignite-based generation capacities to guarantee a reliable electricity supply. In their view, NKPP could hinder the development of a sustainable, diversified energy system [8]. KOSID proposed that energy security could be achieved through: reductions of technical and commercial losses on the transmission and distribution grid; investments in energy efficiency measures in buildings; an aggressive deployment of renewable energy; and the gradual liberalization and regional integration of the country’s energy market [8].

The debate over NKPP and the adjacent New Sibovc Mine has occurred in the context of the contentious restructuration process of the energy sector [38] in which international organizations, such as WB, the International Financial Corporation (IFC) and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), have played a major role through their technical assistance.8 This process has included the EU-prescribed unbundling of the energy transmission network and the energy distribution services from the state-led Kosovo Energy Corporation [38]. Plans to include Kosovo B in the same tendering package as NKPP have been widely opposed and abandoned [38]. KOSID criticized the WB and the IFC as key actors promoting NKPP and advising the restructuration process of the energy sector. KOSID was able to cooperate with international think tanks, NGOs and research institutes, drawing attention in the international arena to the controversial plans for NKPP and the New Sibovc Mine. Locally, KOSID has cooperated with inhabitants of Hade village in the zone of the New Sibovc Mine. The consortium has accused the WB of noncompliance with its own non-voluntary resettlement policies in the context of its involvement in developing a Resettlement Policy Framework and the Resettlement Action Plan for the village [42,47,48]. This cooperation has resulted in an investigation of resettlement activities in Kosovo by the World Bank’s inspection panel [42,49].

On 13 December 2017, GoK signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Contour Global—a US-based company and the only bidder for the project—to develop a single block of 500 MW gross electrical capacity [50]. The GoK characterized the agreement as “historic […] for the people of Kosovo because energy is an inevitable condition for the prosperous economic, political and social future” [50]. The commercial agreements were signed a week later, amid citizen protests against announced electricity price hikes [51]. The bidding process was plagued by secrecy and controversy, for instance in the context of the Government’s attempts to bypass tendering provisions in the Law for Public Procurement [47]. Despite the controversies surrounding procedural issues and the ownership structure9 of NKPP, plans to develop new generation capacities based on domestic lignite were backed by ruling and major opposition parties during snap general elections in June 2017.

4.2. Development, energy security and domestic coal: constructing an indispensable New Kosovo Power Plant
In their field of visibility, domestic and international proponents of NKPP conflate the state of electricity supply with economic development, the state of the environment and political (in)stability in the post-conflict context. In their narrative, they attribute an imminent crisis of energy insecurity to a decrepit state of inefficient as well as highly polluting power plants. Proponents of NKPP argue that energy insecurity can be overcome only through the development of new, lignite-based energy generation capacities. A series of problematizations and parameters delineate the development of the energy sector in general, and private sector investments in new lignite-based generation capacities in particular, as a necessary focus of policy makers. For instance, the WB and the GoK highlight high levels of poverty and poor social services to problematize the fiscal burden that capital and operating costs in the energy sector place upon the national budget10 [1,52,53]. The National Development Strategy 2016–2021 exemplifies how NKPP has been framed as a development project and as key for economic growth. New power generation capacities are foreseen to:
“[p]rovide reliable power supply that will improve the conditions of doing business, facilitate increased private investments and Kosovo’s trade balance through decreased imports. Reliable supply will improve people’s wellbeing. Increased investments will facilitate higher economic growth rates and sustainable development.” ([54], p. 41)


Energy security and a new power plant to ensure it are also deemed essential to political stability in the post-conflict setting [6,47]. Strategic documents invoke parallels between the precarious state of the population in the period leading up to the conflict [1] and the negligence and “[…] deliberate destruction of the electricity system in all its elements […]” ([37], p. 16) by a repressive state regime throughout the 1990s. This potent narrative helps designate abundant domestic lignite as a vital resource for ensuring a reliable electricity supply and hence for the collectively aspired goal of national development. Lignite is rendered all the more precious and purposeful by supporters who consider it to be a vital asset for development, second only to the country’s young population [52,55]. The new power plant ought to allow the country to ‘valorize’ these two assets [52,55]. This framing captures a widespread notion that problematizes the unreliable supply and high electricity prices in Kosovo, seeing as Kosovans are—according to a widely used phrase—‘sleeping on coal’.

Proponents exhort widespread support for NKPP by linking human development with an improvement of the electricity supply [1,4,53]. As a vital project for creating employment opportunities [4], NKPP is expected to enable Kosovo’s population—which is often characterized as young, unemployed and poor—to realize its potential.11 Critical attitudes are rendered problematic and cast as being ill-informed, as inhibiting the development process and even as not having domestic interests at heart. A rather poignant, albeit marginal example, exemplifies attempts to delegitimize critical attitudes towards NKPP by framing them as naïve and potentially unpatriotic:
“[S]ome say that we need to support Russian gas that comes through the pipeline up to Serbia. I am a strong opponent of this idea, having in mind the antipathy between Kosovans and Serbs, and which in fact is an antipathy between the West and Russia; I believe that such a solution is unacceptable in a practical, but also in an economic and geopolitical sense.” ([56], authors’ translation)


In parallel to framing practices, regulatory and knowledge practices have been key to fashioning NKPP as an indispensable project for the Republic of Kosovo. We consider both under the techniques and technologies dimension of the analytical framework. The World Bank’s technical assistance to the GoK [42,57] has been central to furthering NKPP. The WB’s Lignite Power Technical Assistance Project (LPTAP) provided the GoK with advisory services to attract bidders for NKPP and the New Sibovc Mine. LPTAP efforts were concentrated on adjustments to the policy, legal and regulatory framework relevant to the new project,12 on capacity building measures [53] and on developing technical studies. The World Bank Background Paper [59] on the evaluation of power supply options for Kosovo has been a key source used to back claims that new generation capacities based on lignite are necessary to ensure firm baseload capacity, a precondition for a reliable electricity supply. It problematizes the country’s reliance on electricity imports as a major source of energy insecurity, highlighting volatile political relations with Serbia, the high cost of electricity imports, unreliable interconnection infrastructure and a limited electricity surplus in neighbouring export countries as limitations. This document has been at the centre of criticism by KOSID [[60], [61], [62]].

In a similar vein, the draft of the Energy Strategy 2017–2026 [37] draws on more recent economic growth forecasts, reducing NKPP’s net capacities needed for achieving energy security from 600 MW [59] to net 450 MW. While critics have raised concerns over the consecutive reductions of planned capacities for NKPP, arguing that they indicate randomness and a lack of strategic planning in the energy sector,13 annexes of the Energy Strategy 2017–2026 seek to depict a thorough examination of the country’s energy options. Scenarios are evaluated in SWOT14 analyses along key indicators for decision making. The energy strategy is set to pursue the ‘most balanced scenario’, which foresees the development of a 450 MW NKPP, an interconnection line between Kosovo and Albania, and the operation of these two countries within a common electricity trading zone. The GoK predicts that this scenario will ensure security of supply, while also scoring well in goals of energy efficiency, renewable energy development, market integration and emission levels. As such, it touches upon key points of critique by KOSID.

These economic assessments render NKPP knowable as the only viable option for achieving energy security in the Republic of Kosovo. These assessments exhibit a neoliberal rationality, highlighting the necessity of privatisation and market liberalization.15 The regimes of knowing that inform NKPP’s production as inevitable within a sustainable development narrative draw on ecological modernization discourses,16 for instance when coupling NKPP’s development with the prospects of decommissioning the polluting Kosovo A power plant:
“Clearly, there is an urgent need for new generation capacities. This urgent need is compounded by serious environmental considerations, due to high level pollution from the existing old generation technology and high demanding environmental protection obligations.” ([37], p. 17)


NKPP’s framing as an environmentally sustainable project was fostered following an air pollution episode in the capital Pristina in January 2018, as authorities singled out NKPP as a key measure to fight air pollution [65].

4.3. Promoting alternatives to the New Kosovo Power Plant
In a position paper on policy solutions for the energy sector in Kosovo, critics of NKPP reiterate their aim “[…] to provide a policy solution that will secure a sustainable, affordable, environmentally friendly, and secure energy supply.” ([8], p. 7). Members of KOSID argue that the energy sector bears strategic economic and political importance for the country.17 They advocate a sustainable path to a “pro-growth, pro-environment agenda” of development ([8], p. 11), reiterating that their aim “corresponds with the official aim of the Kosovo government,” but that “[i]t is the overall direction and specific policy measures that differ from those of the government.” ([8], p. 7). In line with the assumptions of a counter-conducts perspective, theirs is not a denial of the importance of energy security for development, but rather an engagement to promote other points of intervention to achieve a reliable, affordable and more sustainable electricity supply for economic growth. KOSID and their partners have challenged the expansion of lignite-based infrastructures discursively, through cooperation with communities affected by mining activities and through the production of knowledge claims on possible pathways to energy security.

Critics describe the focus of GoK and international supporters of NKPP on lignite as irrational and excessive, commenting that the abundance of lignite occurrences leads these actors to “obsess over lignite” ([8], p. 9). One of our interview partners noted the difficulty of challenging the focus of the GoK on NKPP, diagnosing a naïve sense of national pride in the country’s lignite abundance.18 Critics themselves tap into a national narrative of progress and belonging to European nations, as they draw Kosovo’s EU accession ambitions and the implications of energy policy decisions into their field of vision. KOSID members call for sustainable economic development and a transition towards a greener, less polluting and decarbonized energy system, on par with technological trends and in adherence with the EU Acquis Communautaire.19 This narrative decouples prospects of national development from domestic lignite and sheds light on the potentials for a policy orientation towards energy efficiency, renewable energy deployment and market liberalization.

Members of KOSID attribute the success of their consortium to its ‘triangle approach’ [66]: a combination of constituents, such as (1) civil society organizations that engage in grassroots mobilization and representation, (2) think tanks that produce analytical reports on various energy policy issues and advocate through expertise and (3) professional journalist networks that ensure public outreach.20 KOSID’s grassroots mobilization efforts resulted in a complaint to the WB Inspection Panel regarding WB’s involvement in the preparation of the legal, regulatory and policy framework for the controversial resettlement practices in the New Mining Field.21 This process led to the initiation of an internal inspection process at the WB [49]. Members of KOSID have also cooperated closely with international NGOs and groups campaigning against the involvement of WB in fossil fuel projects. They have published analyses that were conducted by think tanks and international research institutions. These analyses challenge GoK’s and WB’s ‘There Is No Alternative’ stance (see also [67]) and shed light on the otherwise obscured issue of the long-term costs of NKPP [62,[68], [69], [70]].

An energy options study, conducted by the Energy and Resources Group at the University of California Berkeley, has been a key reference for critics’ efforts to promote alternatives to coal. The report demonstrates that a low-carbon and energy efficiency scenario, which excludes the NKPP, would be more affordable, apt to cover domestic demand and more beneficial for the economy in terms of employment opportunities than a scenario including NKPP [62]. The report calls on donor nations and multilateral development banks to draw from multiple options “to provide support for sustainable energy development in Kosovo” ([62], p. 25). Drawing on this study, KOSID argues that a low carbon scenario is not only possible, but also safer, cheaper and more effective in ensuring energy security. A sequencing strategy for policy initiatives renders the stepwise implementation of the low carbon scenario feasible [8]. KOSID proposes that an “intensive and comprehensive energy efficiency programme combined with aggressive measures to reduce technical grid losses” ([8], p. 7), institutionalized in a national energy efficiency fund, ought to be followed by policies that incentivize investments in renewable energy facilities [8]. Together, these policies are presented as being key to energy security. Indeed, energy efficiency measures are deemed crucial for decarbonization, economic growth, employment opportunities and general improvements in the quality of life in Kosovo [71].

Critics also warn against predicted electricity price hikes, highlighting the potential of NKPP to cause political insecurity rather than ensuring political stability.22 A financial analysis of the planned project by the Institute for Energy Economics Analysis and KOSID [70] projects that the overall price of electricity may increase between 33.8 and 50% upon the development of NKPP. This report problematizes in particular the effect that NKPP will have on households living below the poverty line [70].

Seeking a seat at the table through professional analyses and publications has been assessed elsewhere as a form of counter-conduct, as civil society organizations engage in eminently legible practices to the state apparatus, providing a productive form of criticism and appealing to improve governance towards more sustainable ends, rather than to undo it ([11], p. 310). Critics’ knowledge claims draw on equally legitimate sources, as they rely on an understanding of the economics of coal, of just displacement practices, and of the capacity of liberalized energy markets to “[…] normalize the prices of electrical energy and […] eliminate problems with electric energy supply, which they [NKPP promoters] always use as an argument [for NKPP]”.23 These notions evoke what has elsewhere been identified as WB’s green neoliberal rationality [67],24 as critics call on the WB to adhere to its principle of environmentally sustainable development when supporting GoK’s development of the energy sector. In other words, the World Bank’s support of NKPP is presented as being incoherent with an otherwise sustainable vision of development.

More recently, KOSID has engaged with awareness raising for energy efficiency measures at a household level. A web-based efficiency calculator25 allows households to calculate their energy use and electricity costs. It also calculates reduced consumption and savings that would follow upon decreasing the use of appliances or upgrading to products that are more efficient. In parallel, publications commissioned by KOSID advocate for funds to support refurbishments in the residential sector and policy implementation mechanisms, which would sanction inefficient electricity consumption [72]. The tactics of NKPP’s critics can be seen as expanding ‘the art of the government’ [11], as energy consumption practices at a household level become visible and knowable as crucial for governing energy security.

5. Discussion: navigating energy securitization
In Section 4, we argued that energy security has acted as an authoritative goal and has been central to making the case for the necessity and the redundancy of NKPP for Kosovo’s economic development. Energy security arguments in support of and in opposition to the development of NKPP link energy infrastructures to the goal of national economic development in similar ways. These interrelations reveal how tactics of dissent are enveloped by a strategy of securitization [26], one that underscores the trajectories of promoting and opposing NKPP. Table 1 below summarizes the findings discussed in Sections 4.2 and 4.3 on how NKPP has been produced as an inevitable project for national development by its promoters, and how critics have engaged with modulations of the notion of energy security [17] to make the case against NKPP (Section 5.1).
5.1. From sovereign security to vital systems and population security
Import dependence, technically deficient lignite-based generation capacities, as well as the geopolitical and post-conflict setting of Kosovo feature centrally in the problematizations and promotion of measures towards sovereign energy security by proponents of NKPP. Kosovo’s geopolitical setting constituted a central argument in the earlier phases of NKPP. Drawing on the narrative of a collective history of political repression in the 1990s, authorities established a link between not utilizing coal and the imminent threat of a political dependence on Serbia. As Malone et al. [23] argue, wars of independence and sacrifice, which are prominent in the Kosovan debate, are central to national narratives. Such narratives elicit support for policies and programmes, by referring to the past and the future of the nation [23,64]. Although the framing of energy security as being essential to political stability and territorial sovereignty vis-à-vis antagonist powers has become less prevalent since its planned capacities were reduced, energy security continues to feature in the most recent draft of the Energy Strategy 2017–2026 as an important condition for national security [37].

From the early stages of NKPP, the new power plant was promoted as being coherent with the commitment of GoK to integrate the Kosovan energy system into the regional energy market. The former Minister of Energy and Mines highlighted in his speeches that national autarky was not an objective of the GoK [3]. Nevertheless, energy independence remains an important theme in the GoK’s narrative [73]. More recently, justifications of NKPP have shifted from sovereignty towards a logic of vital systems security [17]. In this context, a secured supply of electricity depends on the development of NKPP and utilization of domestic lignite, as well as a 400 kV interconnection line between Kosovo and Albania and a better integration in the regional energy market [37]. National narratives alluding to regional political relations continue to play an important role in this logic of interdependence between the two energy systems. A general agreement among actors in Kosovo is that the Kosovan and Albanian energy systems are complementary, given Kosovo’s reliance on abundant lignite and Albania’s reliance on hydropower [1,74]. This representation positions NKPP as a central infrastructure for the energy security of both countries. The conceptual distinction between sovereign security and vital systems security is blurred in this instance, as the latter also caters to a logic of sovereign security along locally prevailing understandings of ethnicity26 and nationhood.

Critics of NKPP started out by employing a more straightforward vital systems logic of security. They propose ways to ensure the provision of energy services without increasing generation capacities based on domestic lignite. Their problematizations highlight energy insecurity as a system-property [17], caused by technical and commercial losses in the grid, high electricity demand for heating inefficient buildings and a centralized, coal-oriented generation infrastructure. Improvements in the distribution grid, renewable energy investments, reductions in energy demand and market liberalization constitute appropriate fields of intervention.

By arguing for a shift of policy efforts away from developing NKPP, to concentrating efforts on energy efficiency—“[…] the weak link in Kosovo’s energy sector, but also the low hanging fruit” ([8], p. 14)—proponents make a case for securing practices and spaces of consumption [17]. One aspect of this population security logic is the extension of the notion of security towards the negative implications of NKPP for consumer households. Given the large share of electricity costs in household spending, the development of NKPP has been projected to cause a precarious situation and energy poverty, in particular among the poorest strands of the population [70]. In contrast, a focus on reducing demand through a national energy efficiency programme is set to support households in reducing their electricity bill on top of ensuring more affordable electricity prices [70]. Here, the notion of security extends to political stability: by curbing the increase of electricity prices through a low-carbon and energy efficiency orientation, social unrest can be avoided (see Section 4.3). Critics presuppose households as relevant, but so far inefficient consumers of electric energy, whose conduct in the socio-technical energy system is conditioned by a lack of information [72]. Consequently, consumer practices ought to be regulated through policies, market mechanisms and awareness campaigns [72]. KOSID’s efficiency calculator appeals to rational economic behaviour,27 encouraging households to reduce energy consumption and to invest in efficient appliances. In doing so, critics of new thermal power plants address households as ideally efficient consumers of electricity. Critics elicit a form of conduct that ought to contribute to lowering demand for new generation capacities, whilst at the same time improving the financial situation of households. Moreover, inefficient consumption becomes deviant, as critics argue that inefficient consumption ought to be prevented not only through incentives, but also through punitive measures, such as higher property taxes [8,72]:
“To motivate others to do something which above all is in the interest of a social group, action must be taken in two directions—first to assist to take advantage of the opportunity and then to punish as needed. These two mechanisms must be applied inseparably, constantly and not on preferential basis if the goal truly is to achieve a certain objective.” ([72], p. 14)


This shift in focus from a sovereign to vital systems and population security logic renders NKPP superfluous, as it extends the ‘art of government’ onto the energy network, markets and households as important objects for governing a secured energy system.

5.2. Securitization and ‘coal counter-conduct’
Kosovo’s recent history has been plagued by political unease and armed conflict with Serbia, followed by international oversight and donor activity directed at both state actors [38,47] and non-state actors [76]. This renders the conflict over NKPP and the role of coal for the future of the energy sector complex and multilayered. The extensive and at times divergent involvement of external actors in Kosovo, including the European Union and the United States, has been found to weaken non-state actors in the energy sector [38]. Nevertheless, critics have remained vocal throughout the progression of plans to develop NKPP. What is more, the implication of the WB in the development of the Kosovan energy sector has provided a key site of contestation [67] for local critics of NKPP. Members of KOSID call on the WB to support more sustainable, diversified and competitive options to developing a secure energy system in the country, in line with WB’s sustainable development agenda. Critics have targeted in particular WB’s accountability mechanisms and problematized WB’s plans to act as partial risk guarantee for the private investors of the NKPP. In 2016, the WB reiterated its principled support for NKPP to the GoK, yet announced that it would need to reassess the project’s compliance with its Strategic Framework for Development and Climate Change, conduct an updated energy options study and Environmental and Social Impact Assessment [77].

An analytics of protest seeks to “map the close interrelationship between regimes of government and practices of resistance” ([9], p. 235), illuminating the two as mutually constitutive. It does so by adopting a practices and rationalities focus, rather than an actor-centric approach [9]. Bridge’s [17] elaboration of energy security as a performative concept is particularly useful in discussing the counter-conductive character of resistance to coal-based energy infrastructures. Bridge argues that, by way of various knowledge practices, a securitization strategy can appeal to various logics of security and produce diverse objects and subjects of government. The performative character of such strategies, which can affect broader political relations [17], extends to the production of “new forms of political capacity and agency” ([17], p. 336). In a similar sense, we have argued here that the securitization strategy, which links energy security with the imperative goal of national economic development, is constitutive of the tactics employed to make the case for, as well as against NKPP. Dissent towards NKPP has thus bolstered the link between energy infrastructures and energy security on the one hand and national economic development on the other, while challenging precise technicalities. At the same time, the use of various logics of energy security displays the operation of spaces for political capacity and agency, which Bridge [17] has highlighted. By enabling the construction of transmission and distribution grids, renewable energy potentials and energy saving measures as objects of government, and by rendering electricity consumers at a household level visible and knowable as subjects and objects of government, critics manage to question the importance of NKPP for the collectively aspired goal of national development.

6. Conclusion
We have shown in this article how dissent enacted by civil society organizations against the construction of the New Kosovo Power Plant has simultaneously challenged and reinforced security narratives in debates over appropriate energy projects for national economic development. This became visible by studying dissent towards energy infrastructures through a governmentality-inspired analytics of protest framework, which conceptualizes resistance as a form of Foucauldian counter-conduct. Critics of NKPP seek “to be conducted differently” ([15], p. 194), by other means and tactics, i.e. relying less on coal, yet striving towards the shared objective of a secure energy system. Bridge’s [17] discussion of the performativity and modulations of the notion of energy security has helped us discuss an array of discursive tactics and practices of knowledge production, through which critics have navigated an enveloping strategy of securitizing energy systems. These knowledge practices have rendered negative effects of the planned NKPP and potentials for other energy options to ensure energy security knowable, and have demonstrated new lignite-based generation capacities to be an inadequate object of policy intervention. Critics of NKPP have bypassed a logic of sovereign security, which emphasizes national supply and the importance of domestic energy resources in a geopolitical context. Instead, critics have employed population and vital systems security notions, which highlight patterns of energy flow and consumption, as well as vulnerabilities and potentials in transmission and distribution networks, as issues that ought to be addressed to ensure a secure energy system. Measures that would help decrease demand for electricity, diversify Kosovo’s coal-dominated energy mix and help the country liberalize its energy market emerge as more sustainable, affordable and effective alternatives. These practices manage to challenge claims of NKPP’s inevitability, while at the same time reinforcing the security-focused rationality governing developments in Kosovo’s energy sector.

An important merit of a counter-conducts perspective lies in its critical ethos [30,78]. It draws attention to the ways in which social movements (in our case civil society organizations) can become enveloped in and reinforce the very rationalities and practices of the governing regime they seek to challenge. The combination of the analytics of protest framework with a performative notion of energy security has allowed us to draw attention to how individuals and households become visible and knowable as essential parts of the socio-technical energy system in the course of such controversies. Dissent towards NKPP can be seen as opening up new spaces for governing energy security.

Future studies of public controversies around conventional and alternative energy infrastructures could explore the ways in which “specific practices and rationalities of protest […] themselves work to constitute particular identities and subjectivities through the performance of dissent” ([9], p. 236). Applied to the case of NKPP, the analytics of protest framework was not productive in studying the constitution of dissenting identities and subjectivities, despite this being one of its strengths. Instead, the analysis highlighted how practices and rationalities of dissent can work towards conducting individual energy consumption practices (see also [34]). This observation points to the pertinence of critical relational perspectives that seek to destabilize analytic binaries between governmental and non-governmental actors [9]. Future research could examine where and how dissenting subjectivities might destabilize governing regimes of practice and the constraints of doing so. Evidently, an expanded ethnographic toolkit is necessary to study related processes of knowledge production, since these are key to understanding how objects and subjects of government come to be established in the context of energy controversies [17,19,27]. We have only been able to broadly sketch such possibilities here. Overall, the perspective employed in this article highlights the importance of a thorough, inclusive and critical debate about infrastructural decisions that have multiple, partly severe and long-lasting effects on people, their opportunities and their conduct.